13 Skepticism I
The quest for certainty

The commonsense view is that we all know many things. I believe I know
many facts about my immediate surroundings, much about myself, something about the past, and a little about the future. I believe that we also have
scientific knowledge, that we know some general moral truths, and that it
is certainly possible that many of us know some religious truths. But there
are reasons to doubt much of this. There are reasons to think that at best
we know very little, perhaps just self-evident truths, for instance that if no
vixens are males then no males are vixens, and a few propositions about our
present consciousness, say that I am now thinking about the scope of human
knowledge.

The possibility of pervasive error
As I consider these matters, I look back at the green field. I reassure myself
that I see it vividly. I cannot help believing I do. But an inescapable belief
need not be knowledge, or even justified. Suppose I am hallucinating. Then I
would not know (through vision, at least) that the field is there.

Perfectly realistic hallucination
I find it impossible to believe that I am hallucinating. But I might find that
impossible even if I were, provided the hallucination was as vivid and steady
as my present visual experience. I begin to wonder, then, whether I really
know that I am not hallucinating. If I do not know this, then even if I am
in fact not hallucinating, can I know that there is a green field before me?
Similarly, if I do not know that I am not simply having a vivid dream in which
it seems to me that there is a green field before me, can I know that there is
one there?1
Remembering that we can justifiedly believe something even if we do not
know it, I think that at least I may justifiedly believe that there is a green field
before me, even if I do not know that I am not hallucinating one (or merely
“seeing” one in a dream). Moreover, if I justifiedly believe that there is a green
field before me, how much does it matter whether I also know this? As we

Skepticism I

335

saw in considering the value of knowledge and of this kind of justified true
belief, the latter has substantial inherent value, even if (other things being
equal) less than knowledge. Moreover, the likelihood that my belief is true,
so far as that likelihood is something I can discern, depends on how probable
the presence of the field is, given the sensory experience on which my belief is
based; and in my attentiveness and caution as an observer, I have contributed
all I can to that probability. Despite the possibility of hallucination, then,
it appears that my belief remains justified, and it is as likely to be true as I
can make it by any steps in my power, such as more carefully observing the
grassy texture. Internally, in my own consciousness, I am being perfectly
reasonable in continuing to believe that there is a green field there. So far as
justification is concerned, I am beyond reproach.
These points about justification are plausible, but they give false comfort.
Doubtless, we can have beliefs which, though they do not constitute knowledge, are justified, and we can have such a belief even if its basis is hallucinatory. But it is now not merely possible that I am hallucinating: I am also quite
aware that I could be. Given this awareness, am I still justified in believing
that there is a green field there? Should I not regard this belief as unjustified,
suspend judgment on whether the field is there, and merely hope that it is?

Two competing epistemic ideals: believing truth and
avoiding falsehood
These questions produce a tension. I want to believe that the field is there if
it truly is, for I have a deep-seated desire to believe as many significant truths
as I can. But I also want to avoid believing that it is there if it is not, for I
have a deep-seated desire to avoid believing falsehoods. Both of these desires
are important; and they represent ideals that govern much of our thinking.
But the two ideals pull against each other. The former inclines us to believe
readily, since we may otherwise miss believing a truth; the latter inclines us
to suspend judgment, lest we err by believing a falsehood.
The former ideal, calling on us to believe truths, pushes us toward credulity: believing on grounds that evidentially are too thin—or without grounds
at all—and thereby believing too much. The latter ideal, calling on us to
avoid believing falsehoods, pushes us toward a kind of skepticism: believing
only on conclusive grounds, and thereby—if common sense is right about the
matter—believing too little.
How can we balance these ideals with each other? So far, I have spoken
more about how we fulfill the ideal of believing as many significant truths as
we can than about how we might fulfill the ideal of avoiding belief of falsehoods. Clearly, the easiest way to fulfill the latter would be to suspend judgment on every proposition one entertains, or at least on those which, unlike
certain self-evident truths, lack a luminous certainty that tends to compel
assent. This is the kind of response characteristic of Pyrrhonian skepticism,
an ancient variety tracing to Pyrrho of Ellis (c. 360–275 bc). 2

336 The nature and scope of justification and knowledge

These reflections about possible error through hallucination, about the
apparent vulnerability of justification in the face of such possibilities, and
about the ideal of avoiding error suggest why philosophers have been so
concerned with skepticism. In very broad terms, skepticism is most commonly conceived by philosophers roughly as the view that there is little if any
knowledge. Call this view knowledge skepticism.
A related kind of skepticism is constituted by an attitude or feature of
temperament, such as a disapproval of believing without conclusive grounds.
This is not our direct concern. But if philosophical skepticism is not justified,
then some common skeptical attitudes are not either, and some people who
go through life with a skeptical attitude lack the kind of intellectual balance
that goes with epistemic virtue. One reason, then, for studying skepticism is
to approach a mean between two cognitive traits—intellectual vices, in the
language of virtue epistemology. One vice is (excessive) credulity, which is
too weak a disposition to doubt or withhold belief; the other is (excessive)
skepticism, which is too strong a disposition to doubt or to withhold belief.
Skepticism may also target justification. Typically, skeptics do not take
our justified beliefs to be significantly more numerous than our beliefs constituting knowledge. Call the view that we have little if any justification for
belief justification skepticism. How far-reaching might a plausible skepticism
of either kind be, and how is skepticism to be assessed? I want to pursue these
questions in that order and at some length.
It may seem that skepticism offends so blatantly against common sense,
and so lopsidedly prefers the ideal of avoiding falsehood over that of believing
truths, that it should be dismissed as ridiculous. But it will soon be evident
that skepticism is a serious, perhaps even irrefutable, challenge to common
sense. Moreover, even if skepticism turns out, as phenomenalism apparently
does, to be quite implausible, we learn a great deal about knowledge and justification from studying it.
A serious exploration of skepticism, whether or not we finally accept some
form of it, also tends to help us to avoid dogmatism about our own personal
views and a self-satisfied assurance that our collective outlook as rational
observers of the world embodies knowledge of the sorts of things we think it
does: facts about ourselves, our surroundings, and the ways of nature.

Some dimensions and varieties of skepticism
To understand a skeptical view we should locate it in relation to at least four
dimensions: (1) subject matter, say the past or the future or physical objects
or other minds; (2) epistemic attitude, such as knowledge, justified belief,
and suspended judgment; (3) modality, above all contingency or necessity,
or the empirical versus the a priori; and (4) the kind of being it purports to
limit, say human, subhuman, or superhuman. Regarding subject matter, my
concern is wide-ranging. As for (2)–(4), my concern is with human beings
and mainly with knowledge and justification regarding contingent empirical
propositions.

Skepticism I

337

Much skepticism, whether about knowledge or about justification, is
restricted to a given kind of subject, for instance to propositions about the
world outside oneself, or about the past, or about the future, or about ethics,
religion, or science. Skeptical views also differ markedly in the status of the
knowledge, and in the degree of the justification, they concern. A strong
skepticism regarding propositions about the past, for instance, might hold
that there is no knowledge, or even justified belief, about the past. A weaker
skepticism might hold that although some beliefs about the past are justified
to some degree, there is neither certain knowledge of the past nor any beliefs
about it that are sufficiently justified to make it more reasonable to hold them
than to suspend judgment on them.
Still another difference between skeptical views concerns their order. The
usual skepticism is first order: it concerns the sorts of beliefs or knowledge
we have discussed as typical of the kinds grounded in experience or reason,
and not beliefs or knowledge about such beliefs or knowledge, say beliefs that
ordinary perceptual beliefs often do constitute knowledge. First-order skepticism might deny, then, that I know there is a cold glass in my hand, even
when I have the seemingly familiar experience I would describe as smelling
the mint in my iced tea and feeling the cold glass in my hand. Second-order
skepticism might say that even if I do know this, I do not know that I know
it.
A first-order skeptic is committed to second-order skepticism: to holding, for instance, that there is no second-order knowledge to the effect that
there is (first-order) knowledge, say knowledge of people, places, or things.
This second-order skepticism is obviously true if there is in fact no firstorder knowledge—as from that it would follow then that no one knows there
is. But a second-order skeptic can also hold that even if there is first-order
knowledge, no one knows this.
It is, moreover, natural for skeptics to hold their main views as necessary
truths, as, for one thing, they commonly believe that for fallible creatures
like us there cannot be knowledge or justification of certain kinds. I do not
intend to discuss skepticism in detail in each of the many forms described,
but what follows will apply to a very wide range of cases.

Skepticism generalized
The skeptical challenges I have brought forward can be directed against all
our beliefs about the external world, all our memory beliefs, all our beliefs
about the future, and indeed all our beliefs about any subject provided they
depend on our memory for their justification or for their status as knowledge.
Memory is, after all, at least as liable to error as vision.

Skepticism about direct knowledge and justification
Plainly, if all of the senses can deceive through hallucination, then beliefs
grounded in any of the senses may be justificationally or epistemically

338 The nature and scope of justification and knowledge

undermined in the same way my belief that there is a green field before me
may be undermined by a realization that I might have been hallucinating.
Quite apart from whether perceptual beliefs are true, skeptics tend to claim
that the possibility of such hallucinations either prevents these beliefs from
being justified or, even if they are justified, precludes their constituting
knowledge.
Suppose, for instance, that I might be having an auditory hallucination of
bird songs. Then my present experience of (apparently) hearing them might
not justify my believing that there are birds nearby and is certainly not a
sufficient basis for my knowing there are, even if it is true that there are.
Similarly, there is a counterpart of hallucination for memory beliefs: memorial hallucination, we might call it. I may have the memorial impression that
when I was four I saw my parents kissing under the mistletoe, but this could
be just a romantic fantasy masquerading as a memory.
Beliefs about the future are rather different from memory beliefs. The
former concern future events and hence are not grounded in experiential
states that in some way causally derive from things about which we have
knowledge (as with perception). But even if there is no counterpart of memorial hallucination, there are equally undermining possibilities. For instance,
a confident belief that I will talk with Jane could be a product of wishful
thinking, even when in fact it is grounded in my long-standing intention to
talk with her. Perhaps the belief is an anticipatory delusion. Even my belief
that I will live to discuss skepticism could be mistaken for many sorts of
reasons, including dangers to me of which I am now unaware.
Now consider our apparent general knowledge, whether a priori or scientific, say in arithmetic or science. Because it is possible to misremember
propositions, or to seem to remember them when one does not, or to have
a kind of memorial hallucination that gives rise to a completely groundless
belief, it would seem that the only secure beliefs of general propositions are
of the relatively few that we can know directly without needing evidence.
This apparently leaves none of our general scientific beliefs, and only our a
priori knowledge of self-evident propositions, epistemically unscathed.

Inferential knowledge and justification: the problem of
induction
Even if we leave aside problems about perceptual and memory beliefs, there
is a difficulty for the commonsense view that justification or knowledge
grounded (directly or indirectly) in a basic source can be transmitted inductively. The classical statement of this problem of induction—the problem of
how to justify such inductive inferences—comes from David Hume. 3 Hume
showed that one cannot know a priori that if the premises of a specific piece
of inductive reasoning are true then its conclusion is also true. He noted
that there is no contradiction in affirming the former and denying the latter.
Moreover, one can conceive the premises being true while the conclusion is

Skepticism I

339

false, whereas one cannot conceive its being true that (1) all human beings are
mortal and Socrates is one of them, and yet false that (2) Socrates is mortal.
Even good inductive reasoning is (deductively) invalid.
Consider the inductive reasoning from the premise that the sun has always
risen each day to the conclusion that it will rise tomorrow. Of all such reasoning—reasoning “concerning matter of fact and existence”—Hume says:
That there are no demonstrative [roughly, valid, evidentially conclusive]
arguments in the case seems evident, since it implies no contradiction
that the course of nature may change and that an object, seemingly like
those which we have experienced, may be attended with different or
contrary effects.
(Enquiry, Sec. 4, Part II)
Hence, even if I do know that the sun has risen every day since time immemorial, I could be mistaken in believing that it will rise tomorrow, and it
seems questionable whether I am even justified in believing this.
More generally, Hume’s arguments lead us to ask whether, if our premises
could be true yet our conclusion false, we have any reason at all, on the basis
of the premises, for believing the conclusion. And how can we ever know
the conclusion on the basis of such premises? Indeed, how can we even be
minimally justified in believing the conclusion on the basis of such premises?
The problem of induction, as most often understood, is largely the difficulty
of adequately answering these questions.
The problem can also be put in terms of probability. We normally operate
on the commonsense presumption that when one thing is associated with
another, say a sunrise with the passage of twenty-four hours, and the two have
never failed to be associated in the same way, then the greater the number of
cases of association, the greater the probability that the association will occur
in a new case—for instance that the sun will rise tomorrow.4 We also operate
on the related commonsense presumption that for natural phenomena such
an association can occur sufficiently often to yield justification for believing,
and even knowledge, that the association will occur in a new case.
From a Humean perspective, it will not do to argue as follows: I am justified in believing my conclusion on the basis of inductive support for it, such
as the past regular behavior of the sun, since past experience has shown that
reasoning like this, which has had true premises, has also had true conclusions. For this way of defending an inductively based conclusion simply relies
on yet another inductive argument—it gives a kind of inductive reasoning
to support the view that certain kinds of inductive arguments justify one in
believing their conclusions. It just inductively generalizes about inductive
arguments themselves, using as a guide past experience in which we seem to
have found out that by and large their conclusions turned out true when their
premises were true.
That reasoning, then, apparently begs the question against Hume.5 For

340

The nature and scope of justification and knowledge

it assumes, without independent evidence, part of what he regards as false,
namely, that inductive inference constitutes reasoning that either can ground
knowledge of its conclusion, or can at least justify its conclusion, in the sense
of providing good reason for it. We have taken the battle to a different field—
that of inductive argumentation rather than sunrises—but we have added no
new weapons nor enhanced our forces.

The problem of other minds
One of the major points that Hume so powerfully defended—roughly, that
non-deductive inferences are fallible—is by no means restricted to beliefs
about the future. Such beliefs are, however, so prominent in his discussion
of inductive inference that sometimes the problem of induction is narrowly
conceived as that of how we can show that we have any reason to believe
the future will be like the past. This conception is unduly narrow. Recall
my observing Jim briskly shuffling papers and angrily mumbling curses.
I cannot help believing, on this basis, that he is angry. But this reasoning
leaves my belief clearly fallible: even if I know my premises (through perception), it does not follow that he is angry, and that could be false. He could be
pretending.
The case of Jim’s anger is alarmingly representative. Everything I believe
about what is occurring in the inner lives of others seems to rest on grounds
that are inductive in this way: what I observe—above all, their behavior—
does not entail anything about their minds. They could be pretending, or
psychologically abnormal; or some other source of error could occur. So if I
cannot have knowledge of people’s inner lives from their behavior, apparently
I can never have it.
Worse still, if I cannot know anything about the inner lives of others, can I
even know that there are others, as opposed to mere bodies controlled externally, or by hidden microscopic machinery, rather than directed through
beliefs and intentions of the kind that I take to animate me?
There is, then, a problem of other minds. Can we know, or even justifiedly
believe, that there are any? If our experiences would be just as they are if the
human bodies we interact with are controlled from outer space and have no
inner life of their own, how can we know that those bodies are, as most of us
cannot help thinking, animated by minds like ours?6
The problem is compounded when we realize that we can never directly
verify, as we introspectively can in our own case, what is occurring in
someone else’s consciousness. Thus, all I can do to check on my inductively
grounded beliefs about the inner lives of others is obtain further inductive
evidence, for instance by observing whether they behave as one would expect
if I am right in thinking them to be, say, angry. I cannot, as in my own case,
introspectively focus on the events in their consciousness. How can I know
anything about their mental and emotional life if I am in principle debarred
from decisively verifying my beliefs about the contents and events of their
consciousness? Even if I am sometimes right, I can never tell when.

Skepticism I

341

It may be replied that by far my best explanation—and apparently a good
explanation—of why other bodies behave as if they were animated by a mind
is that they are so animated. The other hypotheses, such as control from
outer space or by a machine, are far-fetched. The suggested reasoning sounds
plausible, but notice that it is still a kind of induction: inference to the best
explanation (abduction).
It is worth inquiring here whether some principle of inference to the best
explanation is self-evident and may thus be presupposed in dealing with
certain skeptical challenges. To simplify matters, let us bypass the common
notion of the “best explanation.” Two explanations, after all, might be equally
good. More important, our best explanation might not be good at all, hence
of little help in supporting beliefs. Consider, then, this moderate abductive
principle: if our only good explanation for a proposition we are amply justified in believing entails the truth or likely truth of a further proposition, we
are prima facie justified in believing the latter proposition. Now imagine that
(1) our only good explanation of why other bodies behave as if they were
animated by a mind is that they are so animated. Taken together with the
abductive principle, this entails that (2) we do have prima facie justification
for believing that (say) the human creatures we interact with in normal ways
have minds.
This is a plausible argument, but skeptics will reject it on at least two
counts. They will question whether the abductive principle is self-evident or,
perhaps, even true; and they will certainly challenge our presupposition that
we are justified in holding (1).
I grant that, if the abductive principle is self-evident, it is not self-evident
that it is. (Arguing that it is self-evident would be a difficult task I cannot
undertake here.) As for (1), surely it too is plausible. Is there any good explanation for the apparently purposive, mentally guided behavior of other bodies
that does not entail their being animated by minds? I doubt it. Granted, these
bodies could be biological robots controlled from outer space, just as I could
be hallucinating them in the first place. But is there any reason to think these
possibilities more than bare logical possibilities? I see none.
It should be added here that the indicated inference to propositions about
other minds as best explaining observed behavior is supported by a strong
argument from analogy: again and again, when my body behaves in a certain
way under certain conditions, I am in a certain mental state, say in pain when
I am burned and cry out; so (surely) the same behavioral pattern in another
body is accompanied by a similar mental state. Other bodies are so much like
mine in physical structure and observed behavior that they are very probably
animated by minds like mine.
There is no need to deny either that positing other minds is our only good
explanation of what we seem to know about other human bodies or that the
analogical argument just sketched is strong. Still, from one proposition’s
being our only good explanation of another (in the sense of ‘explanation’ relevant here) it does not follow that the first is true; and the analogies between
my body and others at most render probable, rather than entailing, that some

342 The nature and scope of justification and knowledge

other body is associated with mental states as mine is with my mental states.
Recall that there are other possible explanations (such as the hypothesis of
control of other bodies from outer space, or by a powerful and clever evil
genius); these explanatory alternatives, if true, would leave my experience
exactly as it is. For another thing, some of these alternative hypotheses can
well explain the analogies that otherwise seem compelling.
Another way to see the power of these skeptical hypotheses is to note that
our experience does not discriminate between the skeptical scenario and the
commonsense one. In that scenario, our experience would be just what it is
if we were steadfastly hallucinating the external world, including even the
human bodies we seem to see. The same holds if we are not hallucinating but
the human bodies are externally controlled. How, then, can our experience
justify us in believing that there is an external world or that there are other
minds?
Putting the problem somewhat differently, if our experience under­
determines the truth of propositions we commonly believe about the external
world, roughly in the sense that it does not decisively indicate their truth as
opposed to the truth of skeptical (or other) alternative hypotheses that can
explain our experience, how can our experience justify our believing such
commonsense propositions? If it cannot, and if, as Hume plausibly argued,
we also cannot know that proposition, how can we be justified in believing
anything at all about the external world?7
It is only a short step from this full-scale attack on inductive inference to a
problem of the body. If, as a skeptic might well hold, our apparent knowledge
of our own bodies is inductively grounded, being based on perceptions and
bodily sensations somewhat as beliefs about external objects are, then can
we know, or even justifiedly believe, that we have a body? Could we not be
steadily hallucinating even our own flesh?
It might be replied that thoughts, including my reflections on skepticism,
necessarily require an embodied thinker. But that point would only imply
that I have some kind of body, not that I can know anything about it. The
point is also far from self-evident and is indeed denied by philosophers in the
powerful tradition of Descartes. They hold that we (persons) are essentially
mental (or spiritual), hence non-physical, substances.
In any case, even if it should be true that thoughts can occur only in an
embodied thinker, the only embodiment needed might be a brain. Hence, on
the skeptical view imagined, the most we could know is that we are embodied
in some way, say in a brain. Whether that brain is itself embodied, or ever
interacts with anything else, would be beyond our knowledge. Why, then,
could I not be alone in the world, or perhaps a “brain in a vat” kept alive
in a nurturing liquid and subjected to hallucinations that falsely convey the
impression of normal life?8 Call this the envatment problem.

Skepticism I

343

The egocentric predicament
In this way, skepticism can drive us into an egocentric predicament: a position that makes it seem clear that all we can (empirically) know about the
world, perhaps all we can justifiedly believe about it as well, concerns our
own present experience. Perhaps, for all I know, I am a lone conscious ego
vividly hallucinating a non-existent physical world. The kind of view in question—that only oneself exists—is called solipsism, and it serves as a limiting
case to be avoided.
Most skeptics have tended to push no further, or at least not to express
very much doubt about our capacity to know propositions of two specific
kinds: those about what is currently going on in our minds and at least those
a priori propositions that are luminously self-evident. But skeptics can push
further. Descartes, in the first of his Meditations, raised the possibility that
there was nothing of which he could (justifiedly) be certain. Recall introspectively grounded beliefs, such as that I am thinking about skepticism. It
seems possible that this belief is mistaken. If that is possible, how can I know
that I am thinking about skepticism? If I know, I cannot be wrong. But here
error is possible. Perhaps I do not even have knowledge of my own conscious
states.
To make this sort of argument work with beliefs of self-evident propositions we must, I think, strain. Descartes may perhaps be read as holding that
God, being utterly omnipotent, could have falsified even propositions of the
sort I am calling self-evident. But could an omnipotent being bring it about
that while some dogs are pets, no pets are dogs? I see no reason to think so.
As Thomas Aquinas and many other philosophers have maintained, omnipotence is simply not the power to “do” things that are absolutely impossible.9
Power is exercised within the realm of the possible: impossible “deeds” are
not candidates for any being to do.
If one accepts this point, one might argue that there is no act of bringing
it about that while some dogs are pets, no pets are dogs. Calling this an act
misuses the vocabulary of action. Hence, the impossibility that an omnipotent being can bring it about does not imply that there is any act which that
being cannot perform. This point, in turn, deprives the skeptic of a way to
argue that beliefs of necessary truths could be false.
This reasoning may not settle the matter, but it is sufficiently plausible
to warrant leaving aside skepticism concerning beliefs of luminously selfevident propositions. These propositions seem not only incapable of falsehood, but, in some cases, also incapable of even being believed without
justification, at least when carefully and comprehendingly considered.
Leaving such skepticism aside takes little from the skeptic in any case. If
these are the only knowable propositions, then we can know nothing about
our world, not even about our innermost consciousness. We are at best in an
egocentric predicament.

344

The nature and scope of justification and knowledge

Fallibility
In appraising skepticism, I want to formulate some of the main principles
that underlie it in what seem its most plausible forms. If they can be shown
to be unreasonable, then the skeptical threat to the commonsense view that
we have a great deal of knowledge and justification can at least be blunted. In
formulating and assessing these principles, we should distinguish skeptical
threats to the generation of knowledge (or of justification) from skeptical
threats to its transmission. It is natural to start with questions about generation. If no knowledge is generated, there is none to be transmitted.

Three kinds of infallibility
Is there really any reason to doubt that, normally, introspectively grounded
beliefs constitute knowledge? It may be true that such beliefs could be mistaken, but what is a skeptic entitled to make of this? The skeptical argument
that comes to mind here is based on what I will call the infallibility claim
about knowledge: if you know, you cannot be wrong. If we simply add the
premise that you can be wrong in holding a given introspective belief, say
that you are thinking about skepticism, it would seem to follow that such
beliefs do not represent knowledge. This kind of argument from fallibility,
as we might call it, can be applied to just about every sort of proposition we
tend to think we know.
If, however, we look closely, we find that the infallibility claim is multiply
ambiguous. There are at least three quite different things it might mean, and
hence really three different infallibility principles.
The claim, ‘If you know, you can’t be wrong’, might have the meaning of:
1 It must be the case that if you know that something is true, then it is true
(i.e., you cannot know something that is false).
Call (1) the verity principle, since it says simply that knowledge must be of
truths (verities). Knowledge can never have a falsehood as its object. The
claim might, on the other hand, have the meaning of:
2 If you know that something is true, then it must be true, that is, the
proposition you know is necessarily true (i.e., you can know only necessary truths).
Call (2) the necessity principle, since it says simply that knowledge is of necessary truths. Knowledge never has among its objects any propositions that
could possibly fail to hold.10 The claim ‘If you know, you can’t be wrong’
might also have the meaning of:
3 If you know that something is true, then your belief of it must be true,
in the sense that your believing it (the fact that you believe it) entails

Skepticism I

345

or guarantees its truth (i.e., only beliefs that cannot be false constitute
knowledge).
Call (3) the infallibility principle proper, since in saying that only infallible
beliefs constitute knowledge it connects with skepticism more closely than
(1) or (2). Knowledge, it says, is never constituted by fallible beliefs, those
that can have falsehoods among their objects.
Unlike (2), (3) implies nothing about the propositional or other objects of
knowledge; instead, it restricts the kind of belief that can constitute knowledge. And by contrast with (2), (3) also allows for knowledge of contingent
(non-necessary) truths, such as that I exist. This proposition can be false
(that I exist is not a necessary truth); but my belief of it is infallible and
therefore cannot be false. If I now believe that I exist, then it follows that I
do now exist.

Knowledge and fallibility
We can now assess the skeptical reasoning that employs the infallibility claim
in one or another interpretation. I will be quite brief in discussing the first
two; the third is the most controversial and most important for skepticism.
The verity principle, (1), is plainly true: one cannot know something that
is false. In this sense, knowledge is infallible. If it is false that the maple is
taller than the spruce, then I do not know it is. But if this is all the infallibility
claim comes to, it provides no reason to conclude that I do not know that
I am thinking (or that anything else I believe is not genuine knowledge).
Granted, it must be true that if I know I am thinking, then I am. But that
tells us nothing about whether I do know I am. The verity principle is itself a
verity, but it does not advance the skeptical cause.
The necessity principle, on the other hand, principle (2), seems mistaken.
Surely I know some propositions that are not necessarily true, such as that I
exist (as noted earlier, it is not a necessary truth that I exist, as it is that vixens
are female). Even skeptics would grant that I cannot falsely believe this, since
my believing it self-evidently entails that I exist (non-existent things cannot
have beliefs at all). It may indeed be impossible for me even to be unjustified
in believing the proposition that I exist when I comprehendingly consider
it, in which case I have in mind some sense of myself. (Descartes seems to
maintain in Meditation II that this case is impossible.) The same holds, of
course, for you in relation to your belief that you exist.11
It might seem that we may grant the skeptic that the only kinds of proposition that cannot be falsely believed are either necessary or the rare kind that
cannot be unjustifiably believed when comprehendingly considered. But that
would also be a mistake: any proposition entailed by there being at least one
belief is incapable of being falsely believed. Anyone’s believing this one—that
there is at least one belief—would entail that it is true (though it might be
possible, given certain logical deficiencies, to believe such a proposition without having justification for it, as is certainly possible for necessary truths of

346 The nature and scope of justification and knowledge

mathematics). Such cases suggest that there is no simple relationship between
the kind of proposition believable with infallibility and the conditions for
knowing or justifiedly believing it.
Even if the necessity principle were true, however, a skeptic could not
reasonably use it, without first defending it by adequate argument, against
the commonsense view that introspective or even perceptual beliefs normally
constitute knowledge. For clearly they are not beliefs of necessary truths,
and defenders of common sense do not take them to be. Hence, invoking the
necessity principle against common sense, without first arguing for the principle, would be in effect a flat denial that such beliefs constitute knowledge.
That would beg the question against the commonsense view.
Suppose, for instance, that a skeptic says that if you know, you cannot be
wrong, in which this means (2), then notes that introspective and perceptual
beliefs (which are of propositions that are not necessary) can be false, and
concludes that such beliefs do not constitute knowledge. This would not be
presenting a good reason to believe the conclusion, but just denying, disguisedly given (2), the commonsense view that we have introspective and
perceptual knowledge. There may seem to be a good argument here, because
it is so easy to take ‘If you know, you can’t be wrong’ as asserting the verity
principle. But that principle is acceptable to common sense, whereas the
necessity principle is not. To argue for the latter by allowing the plausibility
of the former to serve as support for it is to trade on an ambiguity. It masks
poor reasoning—or the absence of any argument or support at all.
The infallibility principle proper, (3), in effect says that only infallible
beliefs can be knowledge. Now as we have seen, some beliefs of contingent
propositions are infallible. Consider my belief that I exist, and my more specific belief that I have a belief. Just as my believing I exist entails that I do
exist, if I believe I have a belief, it follows that I have one: I have at least that
very belief even if I have no others. Beliefs like these might be called selfgrounding, since comprehendingly considering them constitutes a sufficient
ground both for justifiably holding them and indeed for their truth.
The infallibility of these two contingently true, but self-grounding, beliefs
shows that despite appearances, (3) is not equivalent to (2), since (3), the
infallibility principle, but not (2), the necessity principle, allows knowledge
of propositions that are not necessary (i.e., are contingent propositions). But
why should we accept (3)? What reason can the skeptic give for it? Not that if
you know, you cannot be wrong; for when we look closely, we find that when
plausibly interpreted as meaning (1), that is no help to the skeptic, and when
interpreted as (2) or (3) it just flatly asserts the skeptical position against
common sense.
What makes the infallibility claim seem to give the skeptic an argument
against common sense is the way skepticism can trade on the ambiguity of
that formulation: one finds the argument from fallibility attractive because its
main premise, conceived as equivalent to (1), is so plausible; yet the argument

Skepticism I

347

succeeds against common sense only if (2) or (3) is a legitimate premise. (2)
is clearly mistaken, and it is doubtful that the skeptic has a cogent argument
for (3). It will help to consider first the bearing of the concept of uncertainty,
one closely related to the notion of infallibility.

Uncertainty
Like fallibility, uncertainty has seemed to many skeptics to leave us with
little, if any, knowledge. Recall the possibility that I am hallucinating a green
field before me when there is none there. May I be certain, then, that there is
one there? And can I ever tell for certain whether or not I am hallucinating?
Skeptics tend to answer negatively and to contend that if we cannot tell for
certain whether we are hallucinating, we do not know we are not hallucinating. They also tend to argue that if we do not know we are not hallucinating,
surely we do not know that there is a field there.
Moreover, in a way uncertainty cuts deeper than fallibility: for even if I
believe a theorem of logic that cannot be false and so have an infallible belief,
I may not be justified in taking my proof to be sound and so cannot be justifiedly certain. Uncertainty arises when one’s grounds are inconclusive, and
it can arise, as with beliefs of theorems, even when one’s belief is infallible.
Thus, even infallibility is insufficient to render a belief knowledge. At least
two important principles are suggested here.
One principle suggested by reflection on these questions about possible
error is the certainty principle: if one cannot tell for certain whether something
is so, then one does not know it is so. This principle is plausible in part because,
typically, ‘How can you tell?’ and ‘How can you be certain?’ are appropriate
challenges to a knowledge claim. Moreover, ‘I know, but I am not certain’
sounds self-defeating, in a way that might encourage a skeptic to consider
it contradictory. Further support for the certainty principle can be derived
from the idea that if our grounds for a belief underdetermine its truth—as
when a skeptical possibility such as the Cartesian demon hypothesis can also
explain our having those grounds—then one cannot tell for certain that the
belief is true.
Another principle suggested by our questions about the possibility of hallucination is the back-up principle: a belief that p constitutes knowledge only
if it is backed up by one’s knowing, or at least being in a position to know,
the falsity of any proposition inconsistent with p. Thus, if I believe that there
is a field before me, then, as this proposition is inconsistent with my merely
hallucinating a field, I know this proposition only if I am at least in a position
to know that I am not hallucinating.
The back-up principle is plausible in part because one is in a sense responsible for the implications of what one claims to know. If, for instance, I claim
to know that there is a green field before me, and that proposition implies
that the field is not a pavement textured and painted to look just like a green

348

The nature and scope of justification and knowledge

field, it would seem that I had better know or at least be in a position to know
that it is not such a pavement. This, in turn, is commonly taken to imply that
I must at least be justified in rejecting that strange possibility.
The upshot of this skeptical reasoning is that if I know that there is a green
field before me, I apparently must be prepared to back that up by justifiedly
rejecting exactly the sorts of possibilities that the skeptic reminds us are
always there, in abundance. But must I be thus prepared? Let us consider the
certainty and back-up principles in turn.

Knowing, knowing for certain, and telling for certain
Chapter 10 argued that knowing does not imply knowing for certain. This
conclusion suggests that the kind of certainty in question, epistemic certainty, is not required for knowledge, and that having such certainty may be
something quite different from simply knowing. Still, from the point that
knowing need not be knowing for certain, it does not follow that one can
know without being able to tell for certain. Thus, the skeptic may still maintain that the certainty principle undermines the commonsense view that we
have perceptual knowledge.
Let us first ask what it is to tell for certain. A skeptic may mean by this
acquiring knowledge, in the form of an infallible belief, of a proposition that
entails the truth of what one can tell is so. Thus, to tell (for certain) that one
is not hallucinating a green field one might, like Descartes in the Meditations,
prove that there is a God of such goodness and power that—since it would be
evil for God to allow it—one could not be mistaken in a belief properly based
on such a vivid and steadfast perception as one now has of a green field. We
can tell for certain that there is an object before us because we can prove that
God would not allow us to believe this under the present conditions unless
it were true.
Some thinkers might embrace Descartes’s theistic solution here. But one
might also reject the skeptical principle in question, the infallibility principle.
To require that a belief can be knowledge only if—whether in Descartes’s
way or a similar fashion—it can be conclusively shown to be true would again
beg the question against the commonsense view that a belief can constitute
knowledge without being infallible (a belief that can be absolutely conclusively shown to be true is infallible). Thus, if skeptics have no good argument
for the principle of infallibility proper, they should not assume that principle
in defending the view that we can know only what we can “tell for certain” in
this strong sense of the phrase.
Perhaps, on the other hand, telling for certain is simply a matter of ascertaining the truth in question by some means that justifies one in being (psychologically) certain of what one can tell, even if not maximally certain (if
there is a maximum here). If so, perhaps we normally can tell for certain that
we are not hallucinating, for instance by seeing whether the senses of touch

Skepticism I

349

and smell confirm our visual impression. To be sure, the confirming experiences do not entail that there is a green field before me. But we still have no
good argument that certainty (or knowledge) may arise only from entailing
grounds (another controversial view, shortly to be discussed). Thus, this
point does not establish that confirming experiences cannot enable us to tell
for certain that we are not hallucinating.
Moreover, suppose that we interpret telling for certain in the modest way
just suggested, and that we can tell for certain in this sense that what we
know is true. In that case, perhaps there is a weak sense in which beliefs constituting knowledge are infallible. They need not be such that it is absolutely
impossible (logically impossible, in a broad sense) that they be false, as in
the case of my belief that I exist. There need only be something about our
grounds for them in virtue of which they (empirically) cannot be false, say
because it would violate the laws of nature. Water cannot flow (as opposed to
being pumped) uphill, but this is empirically impossible, not absolutely so,
as it is impossible for some pets to be dogs without any dogs being pets. By
contrast, it is not even empirically impossible to win a lottery with just one of
a trillion tickets, and this can explain why the skeptically inclined will likely
refuse to say one can know in advance that such a ticket will lose.
It may be true that grounds of what is commonly considered to be knowledge are typically such that, given those grounds, the belief constituting
that knowledge cannot be false (at least cannot be false given the laws of
nature). Suppose this is true. Should we now say to the skeptic that the beliefs
commonsensically considered knowledge, such as many perceptual ones, are
empirically certain? We may say this only if we keep in mind what was wrong
with inferring the necessity principle from ‘If you know, you can’t be wrong’.
There surely might be causal laws of nature which guarantee that if one is
situated before a field in good light, as I am, and one has visual experiences
like mine caused by the field as mine are, then one sees it, and hence cannot
falsely believe that it is there. But this hypothetical proposition does not
imply that my belief is, of empirical necessity, true, as a law of nature at least
commonly is, any more than the “logical” law that it is necessary that if one
knows that p then p is true implies that p itself is necessary. A guarantee of
truth given certain grounds is not a guarantee of even empirically necessary
truth, much less of epistemic certainty, any more than a guarantee of payment is a guarantee of payment in gold or in some medium that cannot be
devalued.
If the existence of causal laws and associated causes of many of our beliefs
implies the truth of many of our beliefs grounded in experience, such as
my belief that there is a green field before me, it does not follow that those
true ones cannot be mistaken, in the sense of being epistemically certain, or
conclusively justified, or any other epistemic status high enough to satisfy a
skeptic. What follows is only that given the laws of nature and their causal
grounding, they are true. This seems more than enough for common sense.

350

The nature and scope of justification and knowledge

The skeptic gives us no good argument to show that there are no such laws or
that such law-based truth is not quite sufficient to render a belief knowledge
whether it represents certainty or not.12

Entailment as a requirement for inferential justification
The back-up principle fares no better than the infallibility principle proper.
For one thing, it depends on the assumption, which defenders of common
sense stoutly reject, that in order to know that something is true, one must
have grounds that entail its truth. To see that the back-up principle depends
on this, consider first a very simple case. Take the proposition that it is false
that there is a green field before me. This is inconsistent with what I believe,
namely, that there is one before me. Hence, the back-up principle requires
that I at least be in a position to know that this is false. Its falsity entails that
there is a green field before me.
The back-up principle may seem true because one may think: How else,
besides being able to know the falsity of propositions incompatible with
what I believe, can I be adequately armed against the threat of error? If I am
not in a position to know that propositions plainly incompatible with what
I believe are false, I cannot properly back up what I believe. But the falsity
of the negative proposition that there is not a green field before me entails
that there is one before me; for if it is false that it is false that there is one,
then it is true that there is one. Thus, if, by virtue of how I must be able to
back up my original claim, I do know that this negative proposition is false,
then I thereby have (and know) an entailing ground for the truth of what I
originally believed—that there is a green field before me.
Now take a case in which backing up what I think I know is more complicated. Consider the proposition that what I take to be a green field is
really a pavement with such a realistic-seeming grassy green texture that I
cannot tell (perceptually) that it is really not a field. Must I be in a position
to know that this is false to know that there is a green field before me? The
very description of the case suggests that I cannot know, at least by using the
senses unaided by experimentation or specialized knowledge, that the field
is not a textured pavement. But why must I be able to tell this at all? Is there
any reason to think that the field might actually be dyed pavement? Is that a
“relevant alternative,” some philosophers would ask?
One might object that in order to know a proposition I must be in a position to know whatever follows from it (or at least obviously follows from it).
After all, if something does follow from what I know, I could infer it by valid
steps from what I initially know, and thereby come to know it too.
This is an important objection. But in discussing the transmission of
knowledge and justification, we considered cases that apparently undercut
the objection. I can apparently know the sum of a column of figures even if I
cannot, without further checking, know something which obviously follows
from it: that if my wife (whom I justifiedly believe to be a better arithmetician) says this is not the sum, then she is wrong. If this can be true of me,

Skepticism I

351

then neither knowledge nor justification is automatically transmitted across
valid deductive inference.
It apparently will not do, then, to say that we can always count on the
transmission of knowledge from propositions we know or justifiedly believe
to those they entail, even when the entailment is, as in our example, obvious. Thus, even though my seeing a green field plainly entails (for instance)
that I am not seeing a pavement with a textured grassy-looking surface, I
presumably do not have to be in a position to know or justifiedly believe (by
inferring it) that this proposition is false.
Suppose, however, that this view is mistaken, and that knowledge and
justification are always transmitted across valid deductive inference. It may
be plausibly argued that I do have justification for rejecting the skeptical
hypothesis that there is a pavement before me textured to look just like a
green field. It is not just that it appears to me that there is a green field before
me; I also have no reason to think there is anything abnormal in the situation, and some reason to think that, in cases like this, large, nearby familiar
kinds of things are as they appear to me in such vivid and careful observation.
That they are as they appear is at least supported if the abductive principle
is sound; for their being as they appear is surely my only good explanation
of their appearing as they do. On balance, then, I may apparently reject the
skeptical hypothesis and I do know or at least justifiedly believe that there is
a green field before me.
We could also stress that the kinds of grounds I have for believing there is
a green field before me are plainly sufficient for knowing this proposition and
then take that very proposition as my premise for the entailed conclusion that
there is not a pavement before me textured to look like grass. On this view,
the point is that by virtue of perceptual justification we gain (commonsense)
knowledge of a conclusive ground for rejecting the skeptical hypothesis.13
There are other factors one might cite in defending commonsense views
of the scope of our knowledge, indeed, too many to discuss here. My point
is simply this. Because the skeptic has not provided good reasons for the
principles I have already rejected (or for comparably strong principles), even
if knowledge and justification are always transmitted across valid inference,
there may be good reason to say that skeptical hypotheses, such as that
the “field” is a cleverly painted and textured pavement, may be justifiedly
rejected.14

Knowing and showing
There is something we may grant to the skeptic that will help to justify my
rejection of the certainty and back-up principles. Admittedly, to show the
skeptic that my original belief is knowledge, in the face of the suggestion
that one of those explanations of its falsity holds, I may have to know that,
and perhaps why, this explanation does not hold. Showing something, after
all, commonly requires invoking premises for it, and one must presumably
know or justifiedly believe those premises if one is to show a conclusion from

352

The nature and scope of justification and knowledge

them.15 The question ‘Do you know?’ tends to move discussion to a secondorder context in which one seeks not simply to offer grounds for what one
takes oneself to know, but grounds for the second-order proposition that
one knows it. After all, a direct answer to, for instance, ‘Do you know that
she missed the train?’ is something like, ‘Yes, I know because I just checked
the station’, rather than ‘I just checked the station’. The latter reply provides a
ground on which one may know that she missed the train and only indirectly
implies that I do know it. A skeptic would not grant this evidential power to
such a ground, however, and would indeed not take my citing the station check
to provide an adequate answer to ‘Do you know that she missed the train?’
Still, we may ask, why, in the absence of the need to show that I know,
must I, in order simply to have knowledge, have the capacity to show that I
have it, as the back-up principle strongly suggests? Surely I need not. I can
know that if some dogs are pets then some pets are dogs, even if I cannot
show this self-evident truth—perhaps simply because I can think of nothing
more obvious to use as a reasonable premise from which to show it. And if
my wife raises no question of whether my arithmetic answer is correct, I can
know that answer even if I cannot show—without obtaining further grounds
for the answer—that I do know it. (If my original justification were good
enough to enable me to show that if she says the sum is wrong then she is
wrong, perhaps it would also enable me to know, even without showing it,
that if she says this, she is wrong.)
The point that one can know without being able to show that one does
drastically weakens the case for the back-up principle. Moreover, if, as seems
quite possible, I can know the sum on the basis of my calculations without
being able to show that I do—apart from gaining new evidence—then I can
know it without being able, given my evidence from careful calculation, to
tell for certain whether it is true. That would require new calculations and
hence new evidence. This second point directly cuts against the certainty
principle as well as against the back-up principle.
Examining the relation between knowing something and being able to
show it also indicates that the converse of the certainty principle—the show–
know principle, we might call it—should also be rejected: being able to show
something one believes, even being able to prove it, entails knowing it. This can
be seen from our example. Suppose I can now show that if she says the sum is
wrong, she is mistaken, by doing a more careful calculation twice over. Does
it follow that I now know this proposition for certain? I do not see that it
does. From the fact that I now have the ability to show something I believe, it
does not follow that I now know it at all. Having the raw materials to create
something—here grounds for knowledge—does not entail already having it.
Moreover, suppose that, as sometimes happens, I am lucky in a mathematical
hunch; I might still be capable of constructing a proof I myself would not
have expected to discover. By good fortune, we may have raw materials to
create a foundation for something we have fabricated only by a stroke of luck.
My examples of showing something are cases of deductive demonstration.

Skepticism I

353

But it would be a mistake to think that all instances of showing require deductive demonstration or proceed from absolutely conclusive grounds. Both
points were discredited by our discussion of how propositions are established
through scientific reasoning. It appears that we can know certain kinds of
things even if we cannot show them and that, when we can show to be true
something we know, the kind of showing possible for us need not require
proof. We have yet to explore, however, whether there is any way in which
we might show that a commonsense view of the scope of our knowledge is
justified. This will be the main business of the next chapter.

Notes
1 Some writers on skepticism prefer using the dream case rather than
the hallucination one, perhaps in part because Descartes so famously
used a dream argument in his Meditations. For relevant discussion,
esp. of the dream argument, see, e.g., Barry Stroud, The Significance
of Philosophical Scepticism (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1984);
Michael Williams, Unnatural Doubts (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1991);
Robert Fogelin, Pyrrhonian Reflections on Knowledge and Justification
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1994); Sanford Goldberg, AntiIndividualism (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2008); and
Ernest Sosa, A Virtue Epistemology, esp. chapter 1. Another way to raise
skeptical possibilities is to imagine being a “brain in a vat,” i.e., that one’s
brain is alive in a liquid and given just the sorts of stimulation it now
has, so that one would seem to experience things just as one now does.
This example derives from Hilary Putnam, who uses it to argue, against
skepticism, that the very content of such sentences as ‘I am a brain in a
vat’ prevents their being intelligibly thought in the way Descartes apparently believed possible. Because of how language and conceptualization
work, “although the people in that possible world [in which they are
merely brains in a vat] can think and ‘say’ any words we can think and
say, they cannot (I claim) refer to what we can refer to. In particular they
cannot think or say that they are brains in a vat (even by thinking ‘we are
brains in a vat’).” See the selection from Hilary Putnam, Reason, Truth
and History (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981), entitled
‘Brains in a Vat’, in Huemer, Epistemology. The literature contains much
critical discussion, including Huemer’s ‘Direct Realism and the Brainin-a-Vat Argument’, reprinted (from Philosophy and Phenomenological
Research 61, 2 [2000]) in Huemer, Epistemology. See also Timothy
Williamson, ‘On Being Justified in One’s Head’, and my response to
him, ‘Internalism and Externalism in Epistemology and Semantics’, both
in Mark Timmons, John Greco, and Alfred R. Mele (eds.), Rationality
and the Good: Critical Essays on the Ethics and Epistemology of Robert
Audi (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007).
2 Pyrrhonian skepticism need not imply that suspending judgment is

354

3
4

5

6

7

The nature and scope of justification and knowledge

always psychologically possible; and it may also allow that one can accept
a proposition for the sake of argument, and so, without believing it, act
on it as one who believes it would act; but there is no need to discuss this
position here. If what I say about skepticism in general is sound, it can be
readily applied to the Pyrrhonian form.
See, for instance, section IV of Hume’s Inquiry Concerning Human
Understanding (first published in 1748).
This formulation is roughly the one given by Bertrand Russell in The
Problems of Philosophy (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1912). The
formulation should be understood to apply only to phenomena of a certain kind, such as we explore in scientific inquiry and much everyday
investigation; it will not hold for certain special cases. For instance, with
an increase in the number of instances in which I lose a fair lottery in
which I hold one of a million coupons, there is no change in the probability that I will lose; the probability remains the ratio of the number of
tickets I hold—one—to the total number: 1 million. To think my good
day is now more likely to come is to commit the gambler’s fallacy.
I cannot take time here to consider begging the question in any detail;
it is an important but elusive notion. For a detailed treatment see Walter
Sinnott-Armstrong, ‘Begging the Question’, Australasian Journal of
Philosophy 77, 2 (1999), 174–91.
A remark attributed to Bertrand Russell introduces (humorously) the
possibility that we may, perhaps haphazardly, be sometimes right and
sometimes wrong about other minds: “There may be other minds,” he
quipped, “but there certainly aren’t many of them.” In this spirit I might
note another twist to the problem of other minds. As usually conceived,
it concerns whether, in effect, there are as many minds as there seem to
be. But reflection on skepticism can also lead us to a converse worry.
How do I know that when I am asleep my body is not taken over by
another mind, one connected, perhaps, with a part of the same brain
as goes with my mind? And why might there not be several others who
control this body when I do not? Granted there could be a conflict with
another mind over, say, the movements of my right arm; but I could be
built (or programmed) so as never to be conscious when another mind
takes over this body. Call this the problem of too many minds.
There is much recent literature on the extent to which skeptical hypotheses undermine commonsense views about the extent of our knowledge. See, for instance, Butchvarov’s Skepticism and the External World
(New York: Oxford University Press, 1998), Moser’s Philosophy after
Objectivity (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1993) and the books by
Fogelin, Huemer, Klein, Nozick, Rescher, Sosa, Stroud, and Michael
Williams also cited in the bibliography. For a helpful discussion of skepticism focusing on the underdetermination problem, see Jonathan Vogel,
‘Dismissing Skeptical Possibilities’, Philosophical Studies 70 (1993),
235–50.

Skepticism I

355

8 This is the term widely used in recent literature in connection with a
debate between, on the non-skeptical side, Hilary Putnam, who (as
quoted in note 1) denies that one really could be both a brain in a vat and
have the mastery of language needed to raise the question of skepticism,
and, closer to the skeptical side in interpreting such examples, a number
of other philosophers, including Anthony Brueckner, ‘Trying to Get
outside Your Own Skin’, Philosophical Topics 23, 1 (1995), 79–111, which
contains references to Putnam’s original discussions of the brain-in-avat problem and a number of more recent discussions. See also the paper
by Huemer cited in note 1 and his Skepticism and the Veil of Perception.
9 See, for example, Thomas Aquinas’s Summa Theologica (written in the
thirteenth century), Ia, question 25, a.3.
10 As an epistemic principle, (2)—and indeed (1) and (3) as well—would
commonly be taken by proponents to be necessarily true. Thus (2) would
rule out even the possibility of knowledge of falsehoods, as opposed to
the mere occurrence of it. But for our purposes the formulations as more
simply stated will serve.
11 That my thinking entails my existing does not, of course, entail that my
existing entails my thinking. But Descartes’s claim (also in Meditation
II) that his essence is to be a thinking thing led to the following joke
(which I recount as I remember it). Bartender to customer: Do you want
another? Customer: I think not. Outcome: The customer disappears.
12 If there are such laws then there is empirical grounding that is conclusive in the sense that it implies the proposition it grounds with “natural
necessity,” the kind appropriate to causal laws. Because those are not
absolutely necessary, as are logical laws and necessary truths as described
in Chapter 5, it would not follow that the implication is an entailment.
13 This is the kind of strategy taken by Peter D. Klein in Certainty: A
Refutation of Scepticism (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press,
1981); he extends it in ‘Skepticism and Closure’, cited in note 22 of
Chapter 9 and reprinted in Huemer, Epistemology, pp. 552–74. In part,
the issue concerns whether we may simply take it as obvious that we
do know certain things before we have a criterion of knowledge, e.g. an
account that tells us both what knowledge is and whether beliefs constituting it must be infallible. For detailed discussion of this problem
of the criterion—the problem of whether cases of knowledge are prior
to accounts or vice versa—see R.M. Chisholm, ‘The Problem of the
Criterion’, in his The Foundations of Knowing (Minneapolis: University
of Minnesota Press, 1982), reprinted in Huemer, Epistemology; and
Robert Amico, The Problem of the Criterion (Lanham, MD: Rowman
and Littlefield, 1994). For an examination of Moorean commonsensism
in relation to criteria, dogmatism, and skepticism, see James Pryor, ‘The
Skeptic and the Dogmatist’, Noûs 34 (2000), 517–49.
14 There is a sophisticated and plausible compromise with skepticism that
deserves note here. One could argue that knowledge must be understood

356

The nature and scope of justification and knowledge

not unqualifiedly but in terms of relativization to “contrast classes.”
Thus, relative to the contrast class of near perfect imitations, I do not
know that there is a green field before me; relative to the contrast class of
ordinary green things encountered in the same visual way, such as green
ponds and green canvas laid out for picnicking, I do. For a detailed statement of this view—which may be regarded as a kind of contextualism—
see Walter Sinnott-Armstrong’s chapter on moral skepticism in Walter
Sinnott-Armstrong and Mark Timmons (eds.), Moral Knowledge? (New
York: Oxford University Press, 1996). One reply is that knowledge may
be understood without relativization provided we at least (1) recognize
that knowledge attributions occur in a context and are in some way relative to it, and (2) distinguish between the following kinds of things: (a)
knowing there is a green field before one and (b) knowing that there is a
green field before one as opposed to a pavement textured to look just like
one. Knowing the former does not entail knowing the latter, contrastive proposition (nor does Sinnott-Armstrong claim this), but it is easily
taken to require that because (i) the latter proposition apparently follows
from the former and (ii) noting the possibility of ignorance of the latter
is an intelligible challenge to a claim to know the former.
15 The ‘presumably’ is meant to allow that there is a sense of ‘show’ in which
one need not have justification for one’s premises: if they are true and are
cogent grounds for what one wants to show, then invoking them may
serve to show it. Here, however, one might not be justified in believing
the very thing one shows. This objective, externalist way of showing—
call it de facto showing—something is not the one of interest here, which
might be called dialectical showing, as it figures crucially in philosophical
disputation.

14 Skepticism II
The defense of common sense in the face of
fallibility

•

Negative versus positive defenses of common sense

•

Deducibility, evidential transmission, and induction
Epistemic and logical possibility
Entailment, certainty, and fallibility

•

The authority of knowledge and the cogency of its grounds
Epistemic authority and cogent grounds
Grounds of knowledge as conferring epistemic authority
Exhibiting knowledge versus dogmatically claiming it

•

Refutation and rebuttal

•

Prospects for a positive defense of common sense
A case for justified belief
The regress of demonstration
A case for knowledge
A circularity problem

•

The challenge of rational disagreement
Intellectual pluralism
Epistemic parity
Dogmatism, fallibilism, and intellectual courage

•

Skepticism and common sense

14 Skepticism II
The defense of common sense in the face of
fallibility

The previous chapter indicates various ways in which a skeptical case against
what might be called epistemological commonsensism can be resisted. But
even if such resistance is warranted, it leaves open just what may be said positively in favor of the view that the kinds of apparent knowledge and justified
belief discussed in the first 12 chapters of this book are genuine. This chapter
will explore that question.

Negative versus positive defenses of common
sense
In the context of thinking about skepticism, it is easy to forget that knowing something does not require being able to show that one knows it. For
in thinking about skepticism we are likely to be trying to defend, against a
skeptical onslaught, the commonsense view that there is much knowledge,
and we easily think of defending this view as requiring us to show that there
is knowledge. There is, however, more than one kind of defense. The two
kinds I have in mind are analogous to standing firm as opposed to attacking.
A negative defense of common sense, one that seeks to show that skeptical
arguments do not justify the skeptic’s conclusion, does not require accomplishing the second-order task of showing that there is knowledge or justified
belief. That achievement is required by a positive defense of common sense,
one that seeks to show that we have the kinds of knowledge and justified
beliefs common sense takes us to have. A negative defense requires only contending that skepticism provides no good argument against common sense.
It does not appear that skepticism as so far examined provides a good
argument against common sense. Why, for instance, should the skeptic’s
merely suggesting a possible explanation of how there could be no green field
before me, without giving any reason for thinking the explanation is correct,
require me to know, or be in a position to know, that it is not correct? For
virtually anything that could be true, there is some possible explanation of
why. Is this mere possibility sufficient to undermine the force of positive
grounds for belief?
So far, we have not seen adequate reason to reject the commonsense view

Skepticism II

359

that we have much knowledge and numerous justified beliefs. But even if
skeptical arguments do not require rejecting this view, they may prevent our
showing that it is true or even providing minimal justification for it. Let us,
then, explore the possibility of doing this.

Deducibility, evidential transmission, and
induction
When we come to the problem of induction, it seems clear that one assumption the skeptic is making is that if we believe something on the basis of one
or more premises, then we can know it on the basis of those premises only if
it follows from them, in the sense that they entail it. Call this the entailment
principle. It says in effect that knowledge can be transmitted only deductively.
Why should we accept this principle? Not simply because inductive reasoning is “invalid”; for that term may be held to be improperly applied to
it: inductive reasoning is strong or weak, probable or otherwise, but it does
not even “aim” at (deductive) validity. Even if it may be properly said to be
(deductively) invalid, however, that may be considered an uncontroversial
technical point about its logical classification. It is a point of logic, not of
epistemology. So conceived, the point does not imply either that knowledge
of the premises of inductive reasoning cannot ground knowledge of its conclusions, or that justified beliefs of those premises cannot ground justified
beliefs of their conclusions.
One might, on the other hand, accept the entailment principle and argue
that when properly spelled out inductive reasoning can be replaced by valid
deductive reasoning. For instance, suppose we add, as an overarching premise in inductive reasoning, the uniformity of nature principle, which says that
nature is a domain of regular patterns that do not change over time. From
this together with the premise that the sun has always risen each day it apparently does follow that it will rise tomorrow.1
But what entitles us to the premise that nature is uniform? Hume would
reply that it is not knowable a priori, and that to say that we know it through
experience—a way of knowing it that would depend on inductive reasoning—would beg the question against him. For on the Humean view, if our
belief of the uniformity principle is grounded wholly in premises that only
inductively support it, we do not know it. I believe that this Humean response
is highly plausible. The problem of induction must be approached differently.

Epistemic and logical possibility
What perhaps above all makes the entailment principle plausible is the thought
that if our premises could be true and yet our conclusion might be false then
we cannot know (or even justifiedly believe) the conclusion on the basis of
those premises. At first, this thought may sound like just another formulation of the entailment principle. It is not; it is different and considerably

360 The nature and scope of justification and knowledge

more plausible. That is partly why, when it is conflated with the entailment
principle, it seems to support that principle. The ‘might’ in question is epistemic; it is like a farmer’s in ‘That wood dust might mean carpenter ants’ or a
physician’s in ‘Those abdominal pains might mean appendicitis’. This ‘might’
suggests not only that for all we know (or may take ourselves to know) the
pains do mean appendicitis, but also that there is reason for at least some
degree of suspicion that there is appendicitis and perhaps some need to rule
it out.
The statement that certain abdominal pains might mean appendicitis is
not merely an expression of a bare logical possibility of appendicitis—a statement that appendicitis is possible without contradiction—based, say, on no
one’s being absolutely invulnerable to it. If that very weak and general statement represents all we know about the case, we are not entitled to say that the
pains might mean appendicitis. It is also not a logical impossibility that the
Tower of London levitate above the City; but we would be quite unjustified
in saying that it might.
Three notions must be distinguished here. The epistemic ‘might’ just
illustrated suggests some reason to believe the proposition in question and
might be called epistemic probability—not because the probability need be
high but because it bears on knowledge and implies that, relative to all we
know or are justified in believing, knowing any contrary proposition requires
something like ruling out the truth of that proposition. As one would expect,
epistemic probability is stronger than epistemic possibility—roughly, consistency with what we know or may at least take ourselves to know. Both are
quite different from mere logical possibility—what can be the case without
contradiction or some other kind of necessary falsehood. 2
Epistemic possibility does not entail epistemic probability, and neither
is entailed by mere logical possibility. This point bears importantly on the
problem of induction. It is true that if, no matter how good inductive reasoning is, its premises could be true and yet its conclusion might, in the epistemic
sense, be false, perhaps we cannot know the conclusion on the basis of them.
But is this generally the case with inductive reasoning? I cannot see that it is.
Moreover, suppose it could be true that, relative to its premises, the conclusion of inductive reasoning might, in the epistemic sense, be false, what
reason is there to think that this really is true? Skeptics cannot justifiably
argue for this claim as they sometimes do, maintaining, simply on the ground
that the premises do not entail the conclusion, that the conclusion might be
false. Arguing in this way is rather like saying, of just any stomach ache a child
gets after eating too much Halloween candy, that it might mean appendicitis.
It is barely possible that, relative to all we know or are justified in believing
about the child, the stomach ache means appendicitis. But from that bare
possibility we may not automatically conclude that appendicitis is epistemically probable—roughly, that relative to all we know or are justified in believing, we are unjustified in disbelieving that the stomach ache might mean

Skepticism II

361

appendicitis. Nor does this bare possibility rule out our knowing, on inductive grounds, that overeating is the cause. 3

Entailment, certainty, and fallibility
There are other reasons for the attractiveness of the entailment principle,
at least from a skeptical point of view. If one embraces the infallibility
principle, one is in fact committed to the entailment principle. For suppose
that, from known—and hence on this view infallibly believed—premises,
one inductively derives a belief which is not itself infallible, as (empirical)
beliefs which are inferentially grounded typically are not. Because inductive
transmission allows inference of a false conclusion from true premises, the
belief I inferentially derive could, as far as sheer logic goes, be false despite
the truth of its inductive premises and my infallibly believing them. True
premises, even if infallibly believed, simply do not absolutely guarantee the
truth of a conclusion inductively inferred from them. Hence, beliefs of such
inductively inferred conclusions would be fallible (unless they happened to
be self-grounding or to have necessary truths as objects). But then, being
fallible, these beliefs would be capable of falsehood and hence would not constitute knowledge. Thus, knowledge can be inferentially transmitted only by
deductive inference. Only valid deduction inferentially preserves infallibility.4
If one thinks of knowledge as entailing absolute certainty, one might
again be drawn to the entailment principle. For even if a fallible belief can be
absolutely certain, a belief that is only inductively based on it will presumably
be at least a bit less certain and thus not absolutely certain. For the proposition believed—the conclusion belief—is supported by the original belief with
only a probability of less than 1 rather than with absolute certainty, as when
the conclusion is entailed by the premises. This would allow that the premise
belief be certain and the conclusion belief not certain (or less so), as it would
not inherit from the premise belief the same degree of protection against
falsehood.
To see this, suppose that the premise belief only minimally meets the standard for absolute certainty. Then a belief inductively grounded on it can fall
below that standard and thereby fail to be knowledge. Putting the point in
terms of probability, we might imagine a case in which our premise meets the
bare minimum conditions for absolute certainty, which we might represent
by a probability of 1. Then, any conclusion that follows only inductively from
this premise will thereby inherit from it only some lower probability and
hence fall below the minimum level for absolute certainty. Thus, again the
skeptic will argue that only deduction is sufficient to transmit knowledge.
But we have already seen reason to doubt both the infallibility principle
and the view that a belief constitutes knowledge only if its status is absolutely
certainty. Indeed, I do not see that skeptics give us good reason to believe
either these principles or the entailment principle. It does not follow from the

362

The nature and scope of justification and knowledge

absence of good arguments for the principles that they are, as they appear to
be, false; but if there is no good reason to believe them, even skeptics would
approve of our refusing to accept them.
Absolute certainty is a high, and in some ways beautiful, ideal; but it is
neither adequate to the concept of knowledge nor appropriate to the human
condition.

The authority of knowledge and the cogency of its
grounds
There is one further principle we should consider, one rather different from
those examined so far and apparently more modest. It derives in part from
the idea that if you know something, you have a certain authority regarding
it, an authority presumably due to your being in a position, by virtue of some
ground of your knowledge, to see the truth you know. This authority is in
part what accounts for the possibility of knowledge through testimony: if
you know something, you have an authority about it such that normally I can
come to know it, and commonly also to acquire justification for believing it,
from your testimony.

Epistemic authority and cogent grounds
Indeed, if you tell someone that you know something—especially when you
are asked whether you really know it—you put yourself on the line. It is as
if you gave your firmest assurance—an epistemic promise, as it were—that
it is true. If it turns out to be false, your position is somewhat like that of a
person who has broken a promise. You are open to a kind of criticism and
may have to make amends. A good theory of knowledge should account for
this epistemic authority that seems to go with knowing—or to be, in many
contexts, implicit in attributing knowledge to someone.
A stronger but closely associated view is that if you know that a proposition is true then you must be able to say something on behalf of it. After all,
the question how one knows is always intelligible, at least for beliefs that are
not of luminously self-evident truths or of self-ascriptive propositions about
one’s current consciousness (two kinds of belief not in question for the most
important kinds of skepticism); and if one really does know, one should be
able to give more than a dogmatic answer, such as ‘I can just see that it is true’.
The associated principle might be expressed in what I shall call the cogency
principle: with the possible exception of beliefs of certain self-evident propositions and certain propositions about one’s current consciousness, one knows
that something is so only if one has grounds for it on the basis of which one can
(in principle) argue cogently for it.
Since the cogency principle requires only that one can argue cogently for
what one knows, temporary inability to mount an argument would not preclude one’s knowing. Even little children might have knowledge, for perhaps

Skepticism II

363

if they could just find a way to express their grounds they could provide
cogent arguments. And since self-evident propositions and propositions
about one’s current consciousness are knowable even according to most
skeptics, and may be objects of directly justified belief, there is a stopping
place in epistemic chains and no regress need result when one produces a
series of arguments to support a claim. What is known must simply be either
traceable to those secure foundations or otherwise defensible by appeal to
adequate grounds.
If the cogency principle is combined with the entailment principle, it will
immediately preclude anyone’s having knowledge on inductive grounds; for
the entailment principle implies that inductive grounds are never cogent. But
it need not be combined with the entailment principle. If it is not, it can allow
for inductive reasoning of certain kinds to be cogent and thereby to transmit
knowledge.
Even a moderate skeptic, however, is likely to accept at most a restricted
kind of induction, a kind whose premises make its conclusion at least close to
certain. This kind meets a higher standard than is usually applied to inductive inference. Thus, even though the cogency principle is separable from the
entailment principle, it need not be combined with the entailment principle
to be very hostile to the commonsense view that we can know the sorts of
things I have been suggesting we can know, at least if this view is understood
in a foundationalist framework. For this principle strikes at some of the main
sources of knowledge as they are plausibly understood, and it threatens to
undermine our claim to knowledge of the past, the future, and the external
world. Let us pursue this.
It is true that some of our beliefs that constitute direct knowledge (and
are directly justified) can be supported by apparently more secure premises.
For instance, my belief that I see a green field can be supported by premises
about how things appear to me, which concern only my present consciousness. After all, that this is so seems to be the only good explanation of why
my visual field contains a green field. But this supportability by premises
need not hold for everything it seems reasonable to regard as directly known.
It may not hold for apparently memorial knowledge. As we saw in Chapter
3, one might know something through the success of one’s sheer retentive
powers even when the only premises one knows or is justified in using to
support it fail to justify it.
A proponent of the cogency principle would certainly tend to deny that
my memory can be trusted as a source of direct knowledge or direct justification, in part because memory seems far more liable to error than perception. Moreover, I might be unable to provide good inductive reasoning to
support the reliability of memory even in cases in which it is very vivid, if
only because such reasoning would require my depending on my memory for
my justification in believing its premises, say premises about how often my
past memory beliefs have been confirmed. To summarize their track record,
I must remember how things turned out in the past—or at least remember

364

The nature and scope of justification and knowledge

that I wrote the results down as they occurred. I would thus be relying on
memory in order to vindicate it. Still, even if I could give no cogent argument
to justify my memorial beliefs, it does not follow that they are not justified,
or that they do not constitute knowledge.

Grounds of knowledge as conferring epistemic authority
Must we accept even the apparently modest cogency principle, which requires
that in order to know something, we need grounds for it from which we can
(in principle) argue cogently for it? I do not see why. Certainly one can have
a kind of authority without being able to defend it by premises or exhibit it
in argumentation. Consider someone who can always tell “identical” twins
apart but cannot say how. Moreover, ‘I see it’ need not be a dogmatic answer
to ‘How do you know?’ It may simply specify one’s grounds, as when one
says, ‘I see it’ in answer to ‘How do you know there is still ice on the road?’
It says how one knows; it need not (though it may) show that one does, particularly if showing this requires more than exhibiting an appropriate source
of the challenged belief.
There is a general lesson here. When skeptics ask how we know something,
this is typically a challenge to show it. I have already argued that knowing
something does not require being able to show it, so this challenge is not
always appropriate. What I now want to stress is that the skeptical emphasis
on ‘How do you know?’ as a request for a demonstration must not be allowed
to obscure the possibility of taking it as just a request to specify a ground of
one’s knowledge and of fulfilling that request simply by giving an adequate
ground. In doing this successfully, one shows how one knows.
In saying how I know something by citing my ground I may also be doing
something further: exhibiting my knowledge of what the ground supports
and perhaps even of the fact that it does so. But even exhibiting knowledge
need not be showing that one has it. I can exhibit knowledge that there is
black ice before me by taking my foot off the accelerator and coasting over
it while saying “Tighten your seat belt”; this is not doing anything with the
epistemic conclusion that I know there is ice before me. Moreover, even if I
know the abstract proposition that, say, seeing ice on the roads shows that
they are icy, I may not know how to use this connection to show that I know
they are icy. Still, if my knowledge that they are carries an authority that can
be confirmed by my citing my ground, why need I be able to go on to the
sophisticated task of showing that I have knowledge? Again the analogy to
virtue is pertinent: having virtue requires being able to manifest it in appropriate circumstances, but not being able to show—in any further way—that
one has it.

Exhibiting knowledge versus dogmatically claiming it
One might think this approach licenses dogmatism. Granted, saying ‘I see it’
could be dogmatic if intended to show conclusively that I know, for instance

Skepticism II

365

by serving as absolutely proving that there is green grass before me. But the
same words can simply indicate the basis for my knowledge. This is different
from flatly claiming that I have knowledge. Indeed, saying it cites a ground
for my belief which, if adequate, suggests that I am not being dogmatic in
taking myself to know. Perhaps it is precisely because the skeptic’s ‘How
do you know?’ is commonly meant as a challenge to be shown conclusively
that one knows, and not as a request to specify a source or a ground of the
knowledge, that saying ‘I see it’ seems dogmatic in the context of discussing
skepticism, even when the function of saying this is mainly explanatory.
If the issue raised by skepticism is whether we can show that we have
knowledge, the point that an appeal to visual experience does not conclusively
establish visual knowledge is an important concession. But the issue here
is whether the skeptic succeeds in showing that we do not have perceptual
knowledge. In that context, the point is not a concession. Once again, we can
see how skepticism can gain credibility because skeptics make it sound as if
their case against the existence of one or another kind of knowledge succeeds
if we cannot show that there is such knowledge. In fact, we need not be able
to show that there is knowledge in order to have it; and the skeptic must give
us good reason not to believe that there is knowledge.

Refutation and rebuttal
Have I, then, refuted skepticism, even in the few forms considered here? I
have not tried to. Refutation would require showing that those forms of skepticism are false, which in turn would entail showing that there is knowledge
(and justified belief). What I have tried to do is to rebut skepticism in certain
plausible forms, to show that the arguments for those skeptical views do not
establish that we do not have knowledge (and justified belief). Refutation of
skepticism suffices for its rebuttal; but rebuttal does not require refutation.
Now suppose I have succeeded in rebutting skepticism. Where do we stand?
May we believe that we have knowledge, or may we only suspend judgment
both on this and on skeptical claims that we do not?
I have already argued, by implication, that one can know something without knowing that one knows it. For instance, in arguing that much of our
knowledge is not self-conscious, I indicated how I can know that there is
a green field before me without even believing that I know this. I do not
even form such self-conscious beliefs in most everyday situations. Moreover,
toddlers, who do not understand what knowledge is—and so are not in a
position to believe they know anything—can apparently know such simple
things as that Mama is before them.
Even if I did have the second-order knowledge that I know the field is there,
I surely would not possess (as seems impossible in any case) the infinite series
of beliefs required by the view that knowing entails knowing that one knows—
the KK thesis, as it is called—the series that continues with my knowing that
I know that I know; knowing that I know, that I know that I know; and so
forth. There is no plausibility in thinking that if I know that (for example)

366

The nature and scope of justification and knowledge

the field is there, I must know that I know that I know . . . this, up to the
limit of my capacity. I never have such a repetitive thought. Moreover, I do
not think that I believe (or disbelieve) the proposition in question (I have not
tested my memory here); and I cannot imagine a good use for it.5 Given these
points (among others), it would be a mistake to think, as some skeptics might
like us to, that if we do not know that we have knowledge, then we do not.
For similar reasons, it seems possible that we might be justified in believing that we have knowledge even if we are properly unwilling to claim that we
know we do, and perhaps even if we are properly unwilling to claim justification for believing that we do. Let us explore these possibilities.
If foundationalism is correct, then if one can know anything, one can
know at least something directly. Moreover, some of the sorts of things
that a plausible foundationalism says we know directly—for instance, selfevident truths and some propositions about our present consciousness—are
the kinds of things which, simply on the basis of reflection on the examples
involved, it is plausible to think we know. Perhaps, of course, this intuitively
plausible point, even if it does not involve arguing from premises, shows that
we have knowledge. In any case, I think that we are justified in believing that
we have some knowledge even if we cannot show that we do; and I am aware
of no good argument against the view that we have some knowledge even of
the external world.
Might there be a way, however, to give a cogent, positive defense of
common sense: to show that we have knowledge, even of the external world?
And could we establish this second-order thesis even to the satisfaction of
some skeptics? There is no satisfying a radical skeptic, one who denies that
there can be any knowledge or justified belief (including justification of that
very claim, which the skeptic simply asserts as a challenge). For a radical
skeptic, nothing one presents as a reason for asserting something will count
as justifying it.
Could anything be said, however, to show that there is knowledge to a
moderate skeptic: one who holds, say, that although transmission of justification and knowledge must be deductive, we may justifiedly believe, and
perhaps know, at least self-evident propositions and propositions about our
present consciousness? Even if the answer is negative, perhaps we can show
that there is knowledge, or at least justified belief, whether any skeptics
would find our argument plausible or not.

Prospects for a positive defense of common sense
How might an argument for a positive defense of common sense go? Let
us consider justified belief first, as showing that certain of our beliefs are
justified, unlike showing that some of them constitute knowledge, does not
require showing that the beliefs in question are true.

Skepticism II

367

A case for justified belief
One might view the issue this way: if we are to show that there are justified
beliefs, then one result of our argument will itself be producing justification,
specifically justification for the second-order belief that there are justified
beliefs. For to show something by argument entails at least producing justification for believing it.
If we are to provide such second-order justification, we apparently need
at least two things: a general premise expressing a sufficient condition for
justification, and one or more specific premises saying that a particular belief
meets that condition. For instance, the general premise might be the justification principle that
1 An attentively held belief to the effect that one is now in an occurrent
mental state, such as thinking, is (prima facie) justified,
where an attentively held belief is one based on careful attention to the
proposition in question, and where the justification is not absolute but prima
facie: it must simply be strong enough to make it appropriate for a rational
person to hold the belief.6 The particular premise might be that
2 I have an attentive belief that I am now in such a state, namely thinking.
If I am justified in believing these premises, I am justified in inferring deductively from them, and thereby in believing on the basis of them, what they
self-evidently entail, namely, that
3 My belief that I am thinking is (prima facie) justified.
Here I would be inferentially justified in believing (3), at least if I can hold
all three propositions before my mind in a way that avoids dependence on
memory of my premises; and this seems possible for me. (If I needed so
many premises, or such complicated premises, that I could not hold them in
mind at once, then my justification for my conclusion would depend on that
of my memory belief(s) of my premises.) Premises (1) and (2) self-evidently
entail (3), and a moderate skeptic will very likely grant that if, from premises
that I am justified in believing, I infer (without dependence on memory) a
conclusion that self-evidently follows from them, I am justified in believing
that too.
But how am I now justified in believing premises (1) and (2), if I am? There
is some plausibility in holding that the general principle, (1), is justifiable
directly (non-inferentially) by reflection (and is arguably self-evident), and
so my belief of it might itself be directly justified. This is not to deny that
it could be justified by prior premises, since self-evidence does not entail

368

The nature and scope of justification and knowledge

unprovability or unevidenceability. The point is only that it is arguably justified by reflection not dependent on one’s appealing to such premises. As
for the particular premise, (2), I might be directly justified in holding it by
virtue of a justification principle similar to the general one, but applying to
beliefs (dispositional elements), a principle to the effect that if, on careful
introspection, one believes that one attentively holds a proposition, p, then
one is justified in believing one does (presumably directly justified, if one has
introspected carefully).
Now if my belief of my general premise is justified, and if I may justifiedly
hold the particular premise, then surely I may justifiedly conclude that I am
justified in my belief that I am thinking. I may justifiedly conclude this even
if my justification in believing my premises is not direct, as I am tentatively
assuming it is. Moreover, if my beliefs of (1)–(3) are true, they may also
constitute knowledge: my justification for each seems strong enough, and
apart from this matter of degree there appears to be no other kind of bar to
knowledge.7
Given the plausibility of the premises just used to try to show that I am
justified in holding a belief about my own mental life, I am inclined to think
that it can be shown that there are some justified beliefs, even some justified
empirical ones. But even if the line of argument I have used is successful, one
might question whether it extends to any beliefs about the external world.
What would be our general principle for, say, visual perceptual beliefs?
In answer, perhaps we might begin with an instance of a justification principle stated in Chapter 1. Applied to the green field example, this would say
that
a If, on the basis of a vivid and steady visual experience in which one has
the impression of something green before one, one believes that there
is something green before one, then one is (prima facie) justified in so
believing.
Surely we may say this, particularly since the justification in question is
admittedly defeasible. (It could, for instance, be undermined by my justifiedly believing that I have frequently been hallucinating greens lately.)
Suppose this premise may be believed with direct justification, and we may
also believe (possibly with direct justification) that
b I have a belief (that there is something green before me) grounded in the
way the premise—principle (1)—requires.
Then I may, much as before, justifiedly conclude that
c I am (prima facie) justified in believing that there is something green
before me.

Skepticism II

369

To be sure, my perceptual belief is only prima facie justified—roughly, justified in the absence of defeating factors. But this is still a significant conclusion, even if (as seems possible) I could not, by reflection alone, rule out all
of those defeaters.

The regress of demonstration
Supposing this line of argument against the skeptic is sound, have I shown
anything? If showing something is producing a good argument for it from
true premises that one is justified in believing, presumably I have. It is easy,
however, to think that the skeptic would be correct in denying that I have
shown anything. For there is a subtlety here that is easily missed. Even if I
have shown my conclusion, I might not be justified in saying, to the skeptic
or anyone else, that I have shown it, or even in believing I have. For justification for asserting or believing that second-order proposition about my beliefs
would ordinarily require holding (or at least having justification for holding) third-order beliefs, such as the belief that my second-order belief that I
believe I am thinking is justified and true (since this second-order belief has
been shown by good argument). And what in my situation would give me
that still higher-order justification?
The general point is that whatever one’s justificational or epistemic
achievement, justifiedly saying or even justifiedly believing that one has succeeded in it requires justification or knowledge at the next higher level. This
higher-order justification or knowledge may or may not be forthcoming.
Initially, this point may seem to doom my original attempt to show that I
have a justified belief. But I do not think it does; it brings out only that one
can show this without automatically showing the higher-order proposition
that one has shown it. Plainly, we can achieve something even if we are in no
way entitled to credit ourselves with achieving it.
What we have encountered here is a counterpart of the regress of justification, a regress of demonstration: if one shows anything at all and can be
asked to show that, then there will be either an infinite regress of demonstrations, or a circle of them, or there will be some unshown shower (at least
one unshown premise). In a sense, there will always be some point at which
self-congratulation—or a final dismissal of the skeptical challenges—is inappropriate. This is another reason why a moderate foundationalist perspective
should not be thought to lead to dogmatism.
Still, even if I do not know that I have shown that my belief that I am
thinking is justified, I may yet have shown this; and if I have, then I may well
know the proposition that I have shown: that my belief that I am thinking is
justified. Perhaps, moreover, a similar procedure may be repeated, with equal
success, at each higher level to which one can ascend without losing track
of the progressively more complex issue. Then, with sufficient patience, one
could show any given justification-ascribing proposition in the hierarchy—

370

The nature and scope of justification and knowledge

that one has shown that one has a justified belief, that one has shown that one
has shown this, and so on, to the limit of one’s comprehension.

A case for knowledge
The reasoning we have been exploring in connection with justification also
bears on skepticism about knowledge. If the premise beliefs, (a) and (b), are
true, they may constitute knowledge. I may, then, not only be showing that I
am justified in holding a belief about the external world; I also may, as a result
of my reasoning, know that I am justified in holding it. There would then be
at least justificational self-knowledge: self-knowledge to the effect that one
has justification for some beliefs.
In reasoning from (a) and (b) to (c), however, I do not automatically
know that I am showing that I am justified in believing something about
the external world. Suppose I do not know this. Perhaps I only hope that I
am showing it. Then, even if I do have second-order knowledge that I have
a justified belief about the external world, I may not be justified in holding
the third-order belief that I have (second-order) knowledge that I have this
(first-order) justified belief, the belief that there is something green before
me. I have as yet no principle that would justify me in concluding that I know
or justifiedly believe that I have a justified first-order belief. I lack a principle
stating conditions that generate second-order knowledge or second-order
justified belief.
It seems, however, that the sort of justification I apparently have for all
the relevant beliefs, including the belief that I have a justified belief about the
external world, is the kind whose possession by true beliefs is sufficient for
their constituting knowledge. Thus, through reasoning using premises such
as (a) and (b) I may well know that I have justified beliefs about the external
world. Certainly I have reason to think that the skeptic does not know, or
justifiedly believe, that I lack justified beliefs about the external world.
One assumption it is natural to make in using this strategy against skepticism deserves emphasis: the assumption that the crucial principles of justification are a priori, and believing them is justified by reflection (directly, or
at least on the basis of self-evident steps from directly justified beliefs of a
priori premises). Suppose the principles are empirical. Then our justification
for believing them would presumably be broadly inductive. A skeptic could
plausibly deny that, on an inductive basis, we can justifiedly believe them. Let
us pursue this possibility.

A circularity problem
There would apparently be a circularity problem if we had to justify our
crucial principles inductively. For justifying them by inductive reasoning would seem to presuppose using just such principles, principles that
specify, for instance, under what conditions inductive inference can transmit

Skepticism II

371

justification or knowledge. We would have to use induction to develop a track
record for such inferences, say by determining, observationally, how often
their premises are found true and their conclusions determined to be false.
We would need to rely on perception and memory to do this—in addition to
using induction to infer from a good track record on the part of a source to its
general reliability. To acquire justified beliefs about the reliability of perception, moreover, we would need to use perception, say in looking at objects
again to see if our initial color perceptions were accurate.
Are the kinds of principles of justification I have been using a priori? That
is certainly arguable; but it is also controversial. On the most plausible kind
of reliability theory of justification, for instance, a belief is justified by virtue
of being grounded in reliable belief-producing processes such as perceptual
ones; and it is apparently not an a priori matter what processes are reliable,
that is, actually produce a suitably large proportion of true beliefs. This is the
sort of thing that must be determined largely by observation.8
Thus, for reliabilism about justification, in order to know what principles
account for justification, one must know what processes tend to generate
true beliefs. One could determine that only through considerable experience. Hence, if these principles are empirical, the circularity problem just
mentioned would beset the attempt, within a reliabilist framework, to justify
them. We would have to use perception to vindicate perception, for instance
checking on our visual perceptions by relying on tactile ones. Our conclusion could of course be true, but to rely on perception in arguing that it is
reliable would not justify one’s conclusion. It is an interesting question how
much the circularity may be mitigated insofar as, in confirming the reliability
of one sense, we use (as just illustrated) only the deliverances of a different
one. This widens the circle, but it does not provide a way out of it. Indeed, to
validate any source over time, we must rely on memory to track our successes
and failures. Without memory, our lives would be a series of disconnected
snapshots.
On the other hand, I argued above that reliability theories are less plausible for justification than for knowledge, and I believe that it is more reasonable, though by no means obviously correct, to suppose that at least some
principles about the conditions for justification are a priori. I would include
various principles expressing ways in which—as described by Chapters 1
through 5—justification is produced by its basic sources.

The challenge of rational disagreement
As so far described, skepticism applies to much that we ordinarily take ourselves to know or at least to believe quite justifiedly. But skepticism may
be both more selective and more worrisome even when less comprehensive—when it takes a smaller bite. It may plausibly arise when we disagree
with others we consider generally credible on the topic in question, say the
existence of God or of objective moral truths. This example shows both how

372

The nature and scope of justification and knowledge

skepticism may be highly selective and how it may be disturbing. Skepticism
about such matters is highly selective because some people seldom if ever
encounter such disagreements; and it is disturbing because it challenges the
rational basis of beliefs that guide important segments of our conduct.

Intellectual pluralism
This is an age of intellectual pluralism: there is a great diversity of views on
many important matters. It is also an age of rapid and widespread communication: through various media and, especially, the internet, more and more
people are aware of views opposing their own and, often, of evidences for
those views. Should we respond skeptically and conclude that in the face of
such widespread disagreements, we rarely have knowledge or justified beliefs,
at least in controversial matters?
The mere presence of widespread disagreement on a topic, say the objectivity of ethics, does not imply that no one has knowledge of one of the
disputed positions. Nor does that skeptical conclusion follow even when one
party has more evidence than the other(s). Quantity of evidence does not
guarantee a quality sufficient to justify the proposition the evidence supports. This point has been disturbingly neglected by political advertisements
that say such things as ‘Twenty million Americans can’t be wrong’. Even on
the assumption that their testimony can provide some evidence, this claim is
simply false. All of humanity has been wrong on such matters as the shape
of the earth.
Moreover, as we have seen in earlier chapters, some beliefs—such as
some beliefs of self-evident propositions—may be justified on an intuitive
basis that is not, in everyday parlance, viewed as a kind of evidence. The
intuitive sense of truth underlying such beliefs as that nothing is round and
square—an intuitive seeming, in one terminology—may be considered a supporting ground even if it is not considered a kind of evidence. But people
have conflicting intuitions as well as conflicting beliefs based on ordinary
kinds of evidence. Cognitive pluralism is not limited to belief, much less to
theories or other complex views. To see how a skeptical problem is presented
by rational disagreement in cognitive matters broadly construed, we must
refine the issue.

Epistemic parity
The first thing to note is that dealing with rational disagreement presupposes
a measure of non-skeptical confidence. Indeed, if I did not trust my experience in the first place, what would justify my belief that others differ from me
and, despite this, meet a standard of rationality I respect? It turns out, surely,
that to assess challenges to our views we must—whether in religion, science,
philosophy, or other cognitive domains—consider both our experience and

Skepticism II

373

our overall intellectual position, including our resources for explaining why
others disagree, in a way that preserves as much as possible of our view.
More specifically, it is at best difficult—especially in complex cases—to
acquire justification for believing someone else to be an epistemic peer with
respect to some proposition, p, on which the other person disagrees. Roughly,
to be an epistemic peer in a given matter is to be (a) exposed to the same
relevant evidence as oneself, (b) equally conscientious in considering it, and
(c) equally rational in the matter. Even beyond this, there is the question
whether the other person might have background beliefs—such as a belief
that Humean skepticism about induction is sound—that, perhaps by introducing biases, reduce the person’s overall justification regarding p.
At least three further factors should be noted. One is that someone else’s
disbelieving p is itself a reason (even if not a strong one) for a person who
rationally believes p to doubt that the other is a full-scale epistemic peer
in the matter.9 The second is that we are better positioned to make a critical appraisal of our own evidence—at least when it is experiential, as with
memory impressions and intuitions—and of our responses to it, for instance
in assessing whether our belief that p is based on the evidence rather than
on, say, wishful thinking, than of anyone else’s evidence or responses to that
evidence.10 Other things equal, then, we are better justified in our assessment
of our own basis for believing p and of our response to that basis than in
our assessment of the basis of anyone else’s believing it or of anyone else’s
response to that basis.
A third factor is this. As we check and re-check our own grounds for a
justified belief that p and our responses to them, we tend to increase our
justification for believing p, at least when we retain that belief in the light of
this effort. Indeed, even if, from a skeptical disposition, we do not retain it,
our propositional justification regarding p may still rise, as when we come
closer to having conclusive evidence but, being highly cautious regarding p,
withhold belief from it.

Dogmatism, fallibilism, and intellectual courage
These considerations provide some support for the modest conclusion that
the very exercise of critically seeking to establish the epistemic parity of a
disputant may give a rational person a justificatory advantage in the dispute.
Perhaps we may conclude that other things being equal, a rational conscientious attempt to establish the epistemic parity of a disputant tends to favor
the conscientious inquirer who, on the basis of such an attempt, retains the
belief that p. This conclusion, qualified as it is by a tendency element, does
not entail that such conscientious inquirers should never withhold p instead
(neither believing nor disbelieving it). That might be a reasonable thing to do
in some cases, especially if one justifiedly believes a peer has made a conscientious attempt of the same kind and retained a contrary belief.

374

The nature and scope of justification and knowledge

Where conscientious inquirers should not withhold p, retention with
humility might well be a commonly justified result of the kind of reflection
in question. Such retention, moreover, should normally be accompanied by
a sensitivity to, and in some cases a search for, further evidence concerning
p. Dogmatism, then, as implying a belief or strong disposition to believe that
one is correct and the disputant is wrong, or a disproportionately strong belief
of p, is inappropriate in all cases of rational disagreement between peers.
To be sure, each of two disagreeing peers can go through the same kind
of conscientious review of the apparent parity of the other, in which case
the enhancement in justification may be equivalent on each side. Moreover,
repeating such a review should not be expected to increase one’s justification
for p indefinitely and will tend to do so decreasingly with each repetition.
Given these qualifications, it should be stressed that the kind of increase in
justification that such critical reflection may bring does not automatically
warrant reduced humility and may indeed call for more of it.
It turns out, then, that sometimes our plausibly challenged beliefs should,
on balance, be retained; sometimes our unchallenged beliefs should be given
up. There is no simple formula here, in ethics, philosophy, religion, or any
other domain. A good attitude with which to approach rational disagreement
with someone we consider an epistemic peer in the matter is fallibilism of the
kind described in Chapter 12. This attitude contrasts with dogmatism but is
consistent with intellectual courage. That courage is among the intellectual
virtues. It is roughly a settled disposition to form beliefs, and to retain one’s
existing views, with the right level of conviction in relation to the strength
of one’s grounds, and with a kind of fallibilism that leads one to countenance
disagreement but not to give up one’s views under the mere pressure of widespread disagreement.

Skepticism and common sense
Where, then, does this chapter leave us with respect to appraising skepticism?
To begin with, there are forms of skepticism I have not mentioned, and I
have also not discussed every plausible argument for the skeptical principles
I have addressed: chiefly the infallibility, certainty, back-up, entailment, and
cogency principles. But these principles are in some important ways representative of those on which even moderate skepticism rests. I have offered
reasons for rejecting them, and on that basis I have maintained that skepticism, at least insofar as it depends on these and similar principles, can be
rebutted. It can be shown to be rationally resistible.
We are, then, warranted in refusing to accept skepticism concerning justification and knowledge of propositions other than those that are self-evident
or self-ascribe to the believer a present occurrent mental property. If it is not
false, it is at least not justified by what seem the main arguments for it. It is
not clear, however, that anything said above refutes the kinds of skepticism
we have considered. For refuting those views entails showing them to be
false, and it is not altogether clear what that requires.

Skepticism II

375

Positively, I have suggested that on one plausible notion of showing something, namely, validly and justifiably deducing it from true premises which
one justifiedly believes and are good grounds for it, we can show that there
are some beliefs we are justified in holding, probably even some justified
beliefs about the external world (these may perhaps include some about the
inner lives of others).11 I am less inclined to say that we can—by this strategy—show that there is knowledge, particularly knowledge of the external
world. Much depends on the kind of grounding required for such premises
as that I see a green field before me, which, because simple seeing entails the
existence of the object seen, in turn entails that there is something external.
Much also depends on how rigorous a standard of showing is appropriate.
On balance, then, I have supported the commonsense view that we can
know that there is both justified belief and knowledge about the external
world, and can know this even if we cannot show that there is. I also maintain
that there is justified belief and knowledge about one’s own consciousness
and about certain a priori matters. Skeptics certainly do not seem to have
shown that we do not have knowledge and justified belief of these kinds. I
believe that we have both.
Moreover, if, as argued in Chapter 12, it is true that rationality is a more
permissive notion than justification, then whatever the anti-skeptical case for
our having justification, it will count more strongly for the counterpart views
concerning the rationality of our beliefs and other epistemic attitudes. Even
if rationality, as applied to beliefs, is significantly weaker than justification, it
is still the kind of status skeptics tend to deny is ever achieved by our beliefs
about the external world, the past, and many other things.
Perhaps viewing knowledge, justification, and rationality in the way I have
might be thought to be an article of epistemological faith. I do not think it is;
but the difficulty of determining whether it is partly an article of unverifiable
faith, or can be established by cogent argument, or is more than the former
yet less than the latter, is some testimony to the depth and complexity of
skeptical problems.

Notes
1 It does not strictly follow unless we define regularity to preclude the
following kind of thing: the sun rises every day except every trillionth
after the Earth came to be, where tomorrow is the trillionth.
2 As noted in Chapter 5, the synthetic a priori might be necessary without
being logically necessary in the strict sense; similarly, something can be a
synthetically necessary falsehood (thus impossible, as is a round square),
but not strictly logically impossible.
3 Epistemic possibility for us is sometimes characterized simply in terms
of what is possible given what we know, but I think it is appropriate to
include justification here, if only because we may be better able to tell by
reflection on our current overall cognitive resources what we are justified
in believing than what we know.

376

The nature and scope of justification and knowledge

4 This should be taken to apply to non-formal validity: infallibility would
be preserved by the inference from something’s being round to its not
being square, but this is a case of synthetic a priori, as opposed to formal,
entailment.
5 Reasons for doubting that we should posit such beliefs are given in my
‘Dispositional Beliefs and Dispositions to Believe’, Noûs 28, 4 (1994)
419–34.
6 We might perhaps think of the degree of justification in question here as
knowledge-sufficing: the kind sufficient to render a true belief knowledge, in the absence of the sorts of cases discussed in Chapter 10 showing that justified true belief need not constitute knowledge.
7 I ignore here the point that I might have only situational justification
for my conclusion if my believing it is not based on my believing my
premises. Note 11 comments on this problem.
8 For extensive discussion of the kind of circularity problem in question here see William P. Alston, ‘Epistemic Circularity’, Philosophy
and Phenomenological Research 47 (1986), 1–30. Cf. Ernest Sosa,
‘Philosophical Scepticism and Epistemic Circularity’, Proceedings of the
Aristotelian Society Supplementary Volume 68 (1994), 263–90, followed
by a response from Barry Stroud.
9 My thought here is that if you have some reason or ground for believing
p, and you adequately understand the obvious entailment of q by p (as
when q simply is not-p), then you have some ground or reason, even if
not as good ground or reason, for believing q. To be sure, to have some
ground or reason for the higher-order belief that you have this ground
or reason you may well need justification for the higher-order belief that
you do in fact have ground or reason to believe p. But this justification
is commonly achieved in cases of or approaching peer disagreement.
Detailed discussion of the epistemology of peer disagreement, including references to recent literature, is provided in my ‘The Ethics of
Belief: Rational Disagreement, Intellectual Responsibility, and Ethical
Conduct’, in Quentin Smith (ed.), Epistemology: New Essays (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2008).
10 The reference to evidence here must be taken to designate grounds of
an internal kind, such as the “evidence of the senses.” For evidence conceived as publicly accessible supporting fact, I am not suggesting that
any one person is necessarily in a better position than another to appraise
it, though we may still have a kind of intrinsic advantage in appraising
our response to it. But for assessing rationality the central concern is the
person’s experience, memory impressions, reflections, and other internal
elements.
11 I have not directly argued that there are justified beliefs. For I have not
argued for the premise, apparently needed for his conclusion, that we
are non-inferentially justified in believing that the relevant beliefs, such
as the belief that there is something green before me, are based on the

Skepticism II

377

visual impressions constituting one’s grounds for it. This basing is partly
causal, and skeptics are likely to argue that justification for attributing
causal propositions requires inductive, hence inferential, grounds. This
is not self-evident, and I have challenged it in ‘Causalist Internalism’,
American Philosophical Quarterly 26 (1989), 309–20, reprinted in my
The Structure of Justification (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1993). In any case, even if I am not justified in believing that my external
world belief is based on a sense impression, but only that I have the relevant impression, I am justified in believing that I have this justification
for the external world belief: we might say that I am entitled to hold it
even though I may not hold it on the basis of my entitlement.

