CHAPTER I
PHILOSOPHY AND KNOWLEDGE

(1)
The method of philosophy

It is by its methods rather than its subject-matter that
philosophy is to be distinguished from other arts or
sciences. Philosophers make statements which are
intended to be true, and they commonly rely on argu-
ment both to support their own theories and to refute
the theories of others; but the arguments which they
use are of a peculiar character. The proof of a philo-
sophical statement is not, or only very seldom, like the
proof of a mathematical statement ; it does not normally
consist in formal demonstration. Neither is it like the
proof of a statement in any of the descriptive sciences.
Philosophical theories are not tested by observation.
They are neutral with respect to particular matters of
fact. :

This is not to say that philosophers are not con-
cerned with facts, but they are in the strange position
that all the evidence which bears upon their problems
is already available to them. It is not further scientific
information that is needed to decide such philosophical
questions as whether the material world is real, whether
objects continue to exist at times when they are not
perceived, whether other human beings are conscious
in the same sense as one is oneself. These are not
questions that can be settled by experiment, since the

way in which they are answered itself determines how
I
2 THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE

the result of any experiment is to be interpreted. What
is in dispute in such cases is not whether, in a given
set of circumstances, this or that event will happen, but
rather how anything at all that happens is to be
described.

This preoccupation with the way things are, or are
to be, described is often represented as an enquiry into
their essential nature. Thus philosophers are given
to asking such questions as What is mind? What sort
of a relation is causality? What is the nature of
belief? What is truth? The difficulty is then to see
how such questions are to be taken. It must not be
supposed, for instance, that a philosopher‘ who asks
What is mind? is looking for the kind of information
that a psychologist might give him. His problem is
not that he is ignorant of the ways in which people
think and feel, or even that he is unable to explain
them. Neither should it be assumed that he is simply
looking for a definition. It is not as if philosophers
do not understand how words like ‘mind’ or ‘ causality’
or ‘truth’ are actually used. But why, then, do they
ask such questions? What is it that they are trying
to find out ?

The answer to this, though not indeed the whole
answer, is that, already knowing the use of certain
expressions, they are seeking to give an analysis of
their meaning. This distinction between the use of
an expression and the analysis of its meaning is not
easy to grasp. Let us try to make it clear by taking
an example. Consider the case of knowledge. A
glance at the dictionary will show that the verb ‘to
know’ is used in a variety of ways. We can speak of
knowing, in the sense of being familiar with, a person
or a place, of knowing something in the sense of having
PHILOSOPHY AND KNOWLEDGE 3

had experience of it, as when someone says that he has
known hunger or fear, of knowing in the sense of being
able to recognize or distinguish, as when we claim to
know an honest man when we see one or to know butter
from margarine. I may be said to know my Dickens,
if I have read, remember, and can perhaps also quote
his writings; to know a subject such as trigonometry,
if I have mastered it; to know how to swim or drive a
car; to know how to behave myself. Most important
of all, perhaps, are the uses for which the dictionary
gives the definition of ‘to be aware or apprized of’,
‘to apprehend or comprehend as fact or truth’, the
sense, or senses, in which to have knowledge is to know
that something or other is the case.

All this is a matter of lexicography. The facts are
known, in a sense, to anyone who understands the
English language, though not everyone who understands
the English language would be competent to set them
out. The lexicographer, pace Dr. Johnson, is required
to be something more than a harmless drudge. What
he is not required to be is a philosopher. To possess
the information which the dictionary provides about
the accredited uses of the English word ‘to know’, or
the corresponding words in other languages, is no
doubt a necessary qualification for giving an analysis
of knowledge ; but it is not sufficient. The philosopher
who has this information may still ask What is know-
ledge? and hesitate for an answer.

We may discover the sense of the philosopher’s
question by seeing what further questions it incor-
porates, and what sorts of statement the attempt to
answer it leads him to make. Thus, he may enquire
whether the different cases in which we speak of
knowing have any one thing in common; whether,
4 THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE

for example, they are alike in implying the presence of
some special state of mind. He may maintain that
there is, on the subjective side, no difference in kind
between knowing and believing, or, alternatively, that
knowing is a special sort of mental act. If he thinks it
correct to speak of acts of knowing, he may go on to
enquire into the nature of their objects. Is any limita-
tion to be set upon them? Or, putting it another way,
is there anything thinkable that is beyond the reach
of human knowledge? Does knowing make a differ-
ence to what is known? Is it necessary to distinguish
between the sorts of things that can be known directly
and those that can be known only indirectly? And,
if so, what are the relationships between them?
Perhaps it is philosophically misleading to talk of
knowing objects at all. It may be possible to show
that what appears to be an instance of knowing some
object always comes down to knowing that something
is the case. What is known, in this sense, must be
true, whereas what is believed may very well be false.
But it is also possible to believe what is in fact true
without knowing it. Is knowledge then to be dis-
tinguished by the fact that if one knows that something
is SO, one cannot be mistaken? And in that case does
it follow that what is known is necessarily true, or in
some other way indubitable? But, if this does follow,
it will lead in its turn to the conclusion that we com-
monly claim to know much more than we really do;
perhaps even to the paradox that we do not know any-
thing at all: for it may be contended that there is no
statement whatsoever that is not in itself susceptible to
doubt. Yet surely there must be something wrong
with an argument that would make knowledge unattain-
able, Surely some of our claims to knowledge must be
PHILOSOPHY AND KNOWLEDGE 5

capable of being justified. But in what ways can we
justify them? In what would the processes of justify-
ing them consist ?

‘I do not say that all these questions are clear, or
even that they are all coherent. But they are instances
of the sort of question that philosophers ask. The next
step is to see how one would try to answer them.
Once again, it will be best to take particular examples.
Let us begin with the question whether the various
sorts of knowing have any one thing in common, and
the suggestion that this common feature is a mental
state or act.

(it )
Common features of knowledge

Except where a word is patently ambiguous, it is
natural for us to assume that the different situations,
or types of situation, to which it applies have a dis-
tinctive common feature. For otherwise why should
we use the same word to refer to them? Sometimes
we have another way of describing such a common
feature; we can say, for example, that what irascible
people have in common is that they are all prone to
anger. But very often we have no way of saying what
is common to the things to which the same word
applies except by using the word itself. How else
should we describe the distinctively common feature
of red things except by saying that they are all red?
In the same way, it might be said that what the things
that we call ‘games’ have in common is just that they
are games; but here there seems to be a difference.
Whereas there is a simple and straightforward resem-
blance between the things whose colour we call ‘red’,
6 THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE

the sort of resemblance that leads us naturally to talk
of their having an identical quality, there is no such
simple resemblance between the things that we call
‘games’. The Oxford English Dictionary defines a game
as ‘a diversion of the nature of a contest, played
according to rules, and decided by superior skill,
strength, or good fortune’. But not all games are
diversions, in the sense of being played for fun; games
of patience are hardly contests, though they are decided
by skill and luck; children’s games are not always
played according to rules; acting games need not
be decided. Wittgenstein,' from whom I have taken
this example, concludes that we cannot find anything
common to all games, but only ‘a complicated network
of similarities’ which ‘ overlap and crisscross’ in the same
way as the resemblances between people who belong to
the same family. ‘“‘Games”’’, he says, ‘form a family.’

This is a good analogy, but I think that Wittgen-
stein is wrong to infer from it that games do not have
any one thing in common. His doing so suggests that
he takes the question whether things have something in
common to be different from the question whether
there are resemblances between them. But surely the
difference is only one of formulation. Ifthings resemble
one another sufficiently for us to find it useful to apply
the same word to them, we are entitled to say, if it
pleases us, that they have something in common.
Neither is it necessary that what they have in common
should be describable in different words, as we saw in
the case of ‘red’, It is correct, though not at all
enlightening, to say that what games have in common
is their being games. The point which Wittgenstein’s

* L. Wittgenstein, Philosophical Investigations, Part 1, paras. 66, 67,
PP. 31-32.
PHILOSOPHY AND KNOWLEDGE 7

argument brings out is that the resemblance between
the things to which the same word applies may be of
different degrees. It is looser and less straightforward
in some cases than in others.

Our question then becomes whether the different
sorts of cases in which we speak of something’s being
known resemble one another in some straightforward
fashion like the different instances of the colour red,
or whether they merely have what Wittgenstein would
call a family resemblance. Another possibility is that
they share a common factor the possession of which is
necessary to their being instances of knowledge, even
though it-is not sufficient. If knowledge were always
knowledge that something is the case, then such a
common factor might be found in the existence of a
common relation to truth. For while what is true can
be believed, or disbelieved, or doubted, or imagined,
or much else besides being known, it is, as we have
already noted, a fact of ordinary usage that what is
known, in this sense, cannot but be true.

But can it reasonably be held that knowledge is
always knowledge that something is the case? If
knowing that something is the case is taken to involve
the making of a conscious judgement, then plainly it
cannot. A dog knows its master, a baby knows its
mother, but they do not know any statements to be
true. Or if we insist on saying that there is a sense in
which they do know statements to be true, that the
dog which knows its master knows the fact that this is
his master, we must allow that what we call knowing
facts may sometimes just be a matter of being disposed
to behave in certain appropriate ways; it need not
involve any conscious process of judging, or stating,

that such and such is so. Indeed, we constantly
B
8 THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE

recognize objects without troubling to describe them,
even to ourselves. No doubt, once we have acquired
the use of language, we can always describe them if
we choose, although the descriptions that we have at
our command may not always be the descriptions that
we want. ‘I know that tune’, I say, though its name
escapes me and I cannot remember where I heard it
before; ‘I know that man’, though I have forgotten
who he is. But at least I identify him as a man, and as
a man that I have met somewhere or other. There is
a sense in which knowing something, in this usage of
the term, is always a matter of knowing what it is ; and
in this sense it can perhaps be represented as knowing
a fact, as knowing that something is so.

Much the same applies to the cases where knowing
is a matter of knowing how. Certainly, when people
possess skills, even intellectual skills, like the ability to
act or teach, they are not always consciously aware
of the procedures which they follow. They use the
appropriate means to attain their ends, but the fact
that these means are appropriate may never be made
explicit by them even to themselves. There are a great
many things that people habitually do well, without
remarking how they do them. In many cases they
could not say how they did them if they tried. Nor
does this mean that their performances are unintelligent.
As Professor Ryle has pointed out,! the display of in-
telligence lies in the manner of the performance, rather
than in its being accompanied or preceded by any
conscious recognition of the relevant facts. The per-
former does not need to tell himself that if such and
such things are done, then such and such will follow.
He may, indeed, do so, but equally he may not: and

1 G, Ryle, The Concept of Mind, ch. 2.
PHILOSOPHY AND KNOWLEDGE 9

even when he does it is not because of this that his
performance is judged to be intelligent. This point is
convincingly established by Professor Ryle. But once
again, if we are prepared to say that knowing facts need
not consist in anything more than a disposition to
behave in certain ways, we can construe knowing how
to do things as being, in its fashion, a matter of know-
ing facts. Only by this time we shall have so extended
our use of the expression ‘knowing facts’ or ‘knowing
that something is the case’ that it may well become mis-
leading. Jt may be taken to imply that the resemblances
between the different ways of having, or manifesting,
knowledge are closer and neater than they really are.

( iii )
Does knowing consist in being in a special state of mind ?

It should by now be obvious that if ‘knowing a fact’ is
understood in this extended sense, it need not be even
partially a description of any special state of mind. But
suppose that we confine our attention to the cases in
which knowing something is straightforwardly a matter
of knowing something to be true, the cases where it is
natural in English to use the expression ‘knowing that’,
or one of its grammatical variants. Is it a necessary
condition for having this sort of knowledge, not only
that what one is said to know should in fact be true,
but also that one should be in some special state of
mind, or that one should be performing some special
mental act? Is it perhaps a sufficient condition, or
even both necessary and sufficient ? Some philosophers
have maintained not only that there are such cognitive
states, or acts, but that they are infallible. According
to them, it is impossible for anyone to be in such a
10 THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE

state of mind, unless what it purports to reveal to him
is really so. For someone to think that he knows some-
thing when he really does not know it, it is not enough,
in their view, that he should be mistaken about the
fact which he claims to know, that what he thinks true
should actually be false; he must also be mistaken
about the character of his mental state: for if his
mental state were what he took it to be, that is a state
of knowledge, he could not be mistaken about the fact
which it revealed to him. If this view were correct,
then being in a mental state of this kind would be a
sufficient condition for having knowledge. And if, in
addition, one could not know anything te be true
without being in this state, it would be both necessary
and sufficient.

An obvious objection to this thesis is that to credit
someone with the possession of knowledge is not to
say that he is actually displaying it, even to himself.
I know some facts of ancient history and I do not know
them only on the rare occasions when I call them to
mind. I know them at this moment even though I am
not thinking of them. What is necessary is that if I
were to think of them I should get them right, that if
the subject comes up I am in a position to make state-
ments which are authoritative and true. It is not
necessary that I should continually be making these
statements, or even that I should ever make them,
provided that I could make them if the occasion arose.
This point is sometimes made by saying that the verb
‘to know’ is used to signify a disposition or, as Ryle
puts it, that it is a ‘capacity’ verb... To have knowledge
is to have the power to give a successful performance,
not actually to be giving one.

! Op. cit. pp. 133-134.
PHILOSOPHY AND KNOWLEDGE 11

But still, it may be said, however intermittent these
performances may be, it is surely necessary that they
be given at least once. They need not be public, but
even if they are only private they must in fact occur.
It would be absurd to say that someone knew a truth,
which he had never even thought of, or one that he
had thought of but not acknowledged to be true. Let
it be granted that the most common use of the English
verb ‘to know’ is dispositional. It is not even the only
correct use — we do sometimes speak of knowing in
the sense of coming to realize — but let that pass.
The important point is that the dispositions which
are taken’ to constitute knowing must sometimes be
actualized. And the way in which they are actualized,
so this argument continues, is through the existence
of a special mental state.

But what is this state of mind supposed to be?
The reply to this may be that it is unique in character,
so that it cannot be analysed in terms of anything else.
But what then is the evidence for its existence? It is
indeed true that one is not reasonably said to know a
fact unless one is completely sure of it. This is one
of the distinctions between knowledge and belief. One
may also be completely sure of what one believes, in
cases where the belief is refused the title of knowledge
on other grounds; such as that it is false, or that,
although it is true, the reasons for which it is held do
not come up to the standard which knowledge requires.
But whereas it is possible to believe what one is not
completely sure of, so that one can consistently admit
that what one believes to be true may nevertheless be
false, this does not apply to knowledge. It can, indeed,
be said of someone who hesitates, or makes a mistake,
that he really knows what he is showing himself to be
12 THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE

unsure of, the implication being that he ought, or is in
a position, to be sure. But to say of oneself that one

“knew that such and such a statement was true but that
one was not altogether sure of it would be self-contra-
dictory. On the other hand, while the respective states
of mind of one who knows some statement to be true
and another who only believes it may in this way be
different, it does not seem that there need be any
difference between them when the belief is held with
full conviction, and is distinguished from knowledge on
other grounds. As Professor Austin puts it, ‘Saying
““I know” is mot saying ‘‘I have performed a specially
striking feat of cognition, superior, in the game scale
as believing and being sure, even to being merely quite
sure”: for there zs nothing in that scale superior to
being quite sure’.!. And it may very well happen that
even when people’s beliefs are false they are as fully
convinced of their truth as they are of the truth of what
they know.

Moreover, though to be convinced of something is,
in a sense, to be in a particular state of mind, it does
not seem to consist in any special mental occurrence.
It is rather a matter of accepting the fact in question
and of not being at all disposed to doubt it than of
contemplating it with a conscious feeling of conviction.
Such feelings of conviction do indeed exist. There is
the experience of suddenly coming to realize the truth
of something that one had not known before: and it
may be that similar experiences occur when one is
engaged in defending a belief that has been put in
question, or when one finally succeeds in resolving a
doubt. But for the most part the things that we claim

' J. L. Austin, ‘Other Minds’, Supplementary Proceedings of the
Aristotelian Society, vol. xx, p. 171.
PHILOSOPHY AND KNOWLEDGE 13

to know are not presented to us in an aura of revelation.
We learn that they are so, and from then on we un-
questioningly accept them. But this is not a matter
of having any special feelings. It is not certain that
to have a feeling of conviction is even a sufficient con-
dition for being sure ; for it would seem that a conscious
feeling of complete conviction may co-exist with an
unconscious feeling of doubt. But whether or not it
ever is sufficient, it clearly is not necessary. One can
be sure without it. And equally its presence is not
necessary for the possession, or even for the display, of
knowledge.

The fact is, as Professor Austin has pointed out,’
that the expression ‘I know’ commonly has what he
calls a ‘performative’ rather than a descriptive use.
To say that I know that something is the case, though
it does imply that I am sure of it, is not so much to
report my state of mind as to vouch for the truth of
whatever it may be. In saying that I know it I engage
myself to answer for its truth: and I let it be under-
stood that I am in a position to give this undertaking.
If my credentials do not meet the usual standards, you
have the right to reproach me. You have no right to
reproach me if I merely say that I believe, though you
may think the less of me if my belief appears to you
irrational. If I tell you that I believe something which
I do not, I am misinforming you only about my mental
attitude ; but if I tell you that I know something which
I do not, the chances are that I am misinforming you
about the truth of the statement which I claim to know,
or if not about its truth, then about my authority for
making it. In the same way, to say of some other
person that he knows that such and such is so is not

1 Op. cit.
14 THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE

primarily, if at all, to describe his state of mind; it is
first of all to grant that what he is said to know is true ;
and, secondly, it is to admit his credentials. If we
consider that his credentials are insufficient, whether on
the ground that he is not, as we say, in a position to
know, though others might be, or, possibly, because we
hold that what he claims to know is something for
which neither he nor anyone could have the requisite
authority, then we will not allow that he really does
know what he says he knows, even though he is quite
sure of it and even though it is actually true.

But here it may be objected that this excursus into
philology is beside the point. Let it be granted that
the expression ‘I know’ is not always used in English
to signify a cognitive mental state. Let it be granted
even, what is very much more doubtful, that it is
never so used. The fact remains, it may be argued,
that these cognitive states, or acts, exist. When they
do occur, they are sufficient for knowledge. Further-
more, their existence is the only authority worth having,
so that if our ordinary use of words were strictly
philosophical, which it obviously is not, they would be
not only sufficient for knowledge, but necessary as well.

Now I do not deny that ordinary usage is capable
of improvement, or even that some improvement might
be made in it on philosophical grounds. Philosophers,
like scientists, are at liberty to introduce technical terms,
or to use ordinary words in a technical sense. But this
proposal to restrict the application of the verb ‘to know’
to cases where the knowledge consisted in someone’s
being in a cognitive mental state would not be fortunate.
For the consequence of accepting it would be that
no one could ever properly be said to know anything
at all.
PHILOSOPHY AND KNOWLEDGE 15

The reason for this is that there cannot be a mental
state which, being as it were directed towards a fact, is
such that it guarantees that the fact is so. And here
I am not saying merely that such states never do occur,
or even that it is causally impossible that they ever
should occur, but rather that it is logically impossible.
My point is that from the fact that someone is con-
vinced that something is true, however firm his con-
viction may be, it never. follows logically that it is
true.' If he is a reliable witness and if he is in a good
position to assess the truth of whatever statement is in
question, then his being convinced of its truth may pro-
vide us with a strong reason for accepting it ; but it can-
not be a conclusive reason. There will not be a formal
contradiction in saying both that the man’s state of
mind is such that he is absolutely sure that a given
statement is true, and that the statement is false. There
would indeed be a contradiction in saying both that he
knew the statement to be true, and that it was false;
but this, as has already been explained, is because it
enters into the meaning of the word ‘know’ that one
cannot know what is not true. It cannot validly be
inferred from this linguistic fact that when someone is
considering a statement which he knows to be true, it
is his state of mind that guarantees its truth. The
statement is true if, and only if, what it states is so, or,
in other words, if the situation which it describes is as
it describes it. And whether the situation really is as
it is described is not to be decided merely by examining
the attitude which anyone who considers the statement
has towards it, not even if the person who considers it

knows it to be true. If philosophers have denied, or

1 Except in the rare cases when the truth of the statement in
question is a logical condition of its being believed, as in the assertion
of one’s own existence. Vide Chapter II, section iii.
16 THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE

overlooked, this point, the fault may lie in their use of
such expressions as ‘state of knowledge’. For if to
say of someone that he is in a state of knowledge is
merely to describe his condition of mind, it does not
entail that there is anything which he knows ; and if it
does entail that there is something which he knows,
then, as we have seen, it does not merely describe his
condition of mind. Since the expression is in any case
artificial, it may be understood in either of these ways,
though I suppose it would be more natural to take it
in the second sense, as signifying the opposite of being
in a state of ignorance. What we may not do is use it
in both senses at once, for they are incompatible; an
expression cannot refer only to a condition of mind,
and to something else besides. The mistake should be
obvious when it is pointed out, but it has not always
been avoided. And the result is that a condition of
mind, ambiguously referred to as a state of knowledge,
is wrongly thought to be sufficient to guarantee the
truth of the statements upon which it is supposed to
be directed.

But unless some states of mind are cognitive, it may
be said, how can we come to know anything? We
may make the truth of some statements depend upon
the truth of others, but this process cannot go on for
ever. There must be some statements of empirical fact
which are directly verified. And in what can this
verification consist except in our having the appropriate
experiences? But then these experiences will be
cognitive: to have whatever experience it may be will
itself be a way of knowing something to be true. And
a similar argument applies to @ priori statements, like
those of logic or pure mathematics. We may prove one
mathematical statement by deducing it from others,
PHILOSOPHY AND KNOWLEDGE 17

but the proof must start somewhere. There must be
at least one statement which is accepted without such
proof, an axiom of some sort which is known intuitively.
Even if we are able to explain away our knowledge of
such axioms, by showing that they are true by defini-
tion, we still have to see that a set of definitions is
consistent. ‘To conduct any formal proof, we have to
be able to see that one statement follows logically from
another. But what is this seeing that one statement
follows from another except the performance of a
cognitive act ?

The bases of this argument are sound. We do just
have to See that certain proofs are valid, and it is
through having some experience that we discover the
truth or falsehood of any statement of empirical fact.
In the case of some such statements, it may even be
that our having certain experiences verifies them con-
clusively. This is a point which will have to be con-
sidered later on. But in any such case what verifies
the statement, whether conclusively or not, is the
existence of the experience, not the confidence that we
may have in some description of it. To take a simple
example, what verifies the statement that I have a head-
ache is my feeling a headache, not my having a feeling
of confidence that the statement that I have a headache
is true. Of course if I do have a headache and also
understand the statement, I shall undoubtedly accept
it as being true. This is the ground for saying that if I
have such an experience, I know that I am having it.
But, in this sense, my knowing that I am having the
experience is just my having it and being able to
identify it. I know that I am having it inasmuch as
I correctly take it as verifying the statement which
describes it. But my justification for accepting the
18 THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE

statement is not that I have a cognitive, or any other
attitude towards it: it is simply that I am having
the experience. To say that the experience itself is
cognitive is correct, though perhaps misleading, if it
is merely a way of saying that it is a conscious experi-
ence. It may still be correct if it is a way of saying that
the experience is recognized for what it is by the
person who is having it, though, as we shall see later
on, such recognition can be mistaken. It is not correct
if it is taken as implying that the experience either
consists in or includes a process of infallibly apprehend-
ing some statement to be true.

Similarly, what makes it true, for example, that the
conclusion of a syllogism follows from the premises is
that the inference exemplifies a law of logic. And if
we are asked what makes the law of logic true, we can
in this and in many other cases provide a proof. But
this proof in its turn relies upon some law of logic.
There will come a point, therefore, when we are
reduced to saying of some logical statement simply that
it is valid. Now to be in a position to say that such a
statement is valid we must be able to see that it is so,
but it is not made valid by our seeing that it is. It is
valid in its own right. Of course if ‘seeing’ here has
the force of ‘knowing’, then the fact that the statement
is valid will indeed follow from the fact that it is seen to
beso. But once again this makes only the verbal point,
that we are not, in this usage, entitled to talk of ‘seeing’
something to be true unless it really is true. It does
not prove that there are, or can be, any mental states
of intuition which are such that their existence affords
an absolute guarantee that one really is, in this sense,
seeing what one thinks one sees. It must always

remain possible that one is mistaken. Admittedly, if
PHILOSOPHY AND KNOWLEDGE 19

someone thinks that he may have been mistaken in
accepting some logical statement which had seemed to
him evidently true, there may be nothing for him to
do but just look at it again. And if this second look
confirms the first, his doubts may reasonably be put to
rest. But the truth of the statement in question still
does not logically follow from the fact that it continues
to strike him as self-evident. Truths of logic make no
reference to persons: consequently, they cannot be
established by any mere description of some person’s
mental state. And this holds good whatever the mental
state may be.

This is not to say that we do not know the truth of
any @ priori statements, or even that we do not know
some of them intuitively, if to know them intuitively
is to know them without proof. Our argument no more
implies this than it implies that we cannot know any
empirical statements to be true. It is designed to
show, not that we do not have the knowledge which
we think we have, but only that knowing should not
be represented as a matter of being in some infal-
lible state of consciousness: for there cannot be such
states.

This point is important, if only because their
neglect of it has led philosophers into difficulties which
might have been avoided. In Berkeley’s well-known
phrase they ‘have first raised a dust, and then complain,
we cannot see’.! Starting from the premise that con-
sciousness, in the sense of cognitive awareness, must
always be consciousness of something, they have per-
plexed themselves with such questions as what con-
sciousness is in itself and how it is related to the things,

1 G. Berkeley, The Principles of Human Knowledge, Introduction,
section iii.
20 THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE

or facts, which are its objects. It does not seem to be
identical with its objects, yet neither does it seem to be
anything apart from them. They are separate, yet
nothing separates them. When there is added the
further premise that consciousness is also self-conscious,
the problem becomes more complicated still. In
attempting to solve it existentialist philosophers have
gone so far as to deny the law of identity and even to
speak of ‘the nothing’ as if it were a special sort of
agent, one of whose functions was to divide conscious-
ness from itself. But apart from their own obvious
demerits, these are reactions to a problem which should
not arise. It depends upon the initial mistake of
assuming that a naive analysis in terms of act and
object yields an adequate account of knowledge.

Other philosophers, besides the existentialists, have
made the mistake of treating knowledge as though it
consisted in the possession of an inner searchlight. How
far, they then ask, can the searchlight reach? Is it
confined to the present or can its rays illuminate the
past? Is not remembering a way of knowing? But
does it then follow that the past is still real? Perhaps
the light can even play upon the future. But how can
it be possible to inspect what does not yet exist? It is
commonly assumed that we can train the searchlight
upon our own conscious states. But can it ever go
beyond them? Do physical objects come within its
scope? Do the thoughts and feelings of others? Some
philosophers have held that moral and aesthetic values
can be objects of knowledge. Numbers and abstract
entities have also been included. Indeed Plato seems
to have thought that these were the only things that
could be really known. Religious persons have claimed
to be acquainted with a deity. And does not the experi-
PHILOSOPHY AND KNOWLEDGE 21

ence of mystics suggest that the rays can penetrate
beyond the actual world ? But must there then not be
a suprasensible reality? For it is taken for granted
that whatever the searchlight can illuminate must in
some manner exist.

Not all these questions are fictitious. There are
genuine problems about the character and extent of
what can be known. But this fashion of presenting
them is a great impediment to their solution. It sug-
gests that all that need be done to discover what it is
possible to know, and consequently what is real, is to
examine the states of mind of those who lay claim to
knowledge. But, setting aside the question how such
an examination could be made, it would be little to the
purpose. The most that it could reveal would be that
the subjects were having certain experiences and that
they were convinced of the truth of whatever it was
that these experiences led them to assert. But this
would not prove that they knew anything at all, except,
possibly, that they were having the experiences in
question. It would still have to be established by an
independent argument that the experiences disclosed
the existence of anything beyond themselves. And
there is another way in which this talk of knowing
objects is misleading. It fosters mistaken views of the
dependence of questions about the criteria of know-
ledge upon questions about reality. Thus followers of
Plato are apt to make such pronouncements as that ‘the
perfectly real can alone be perfectly known’:! but it
is not clear even what this means unless it is merely a
portentous way of saying that one cannot know what is
not the case. We shall see, for example, that the fact

Dean Inge, ‘Philosophy and Religion’, Contemporary British
Philosophy, 1st series, p. 191.
22 THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE

that historical statements can be known does not oblige
us to conclude that the past is real, unless to say that
the past is real is just a way of saying that there are
historical statements which are true. In this, as in
other cases, it will be found that questions about the
possibility of knowledge are to be construed as ques-
tions about the analysis of different types of statement
and about the grounds that there may be for accepting
them.

The mistaken doctrine that knowing is an infallible
state of mind may have contributed to the view, which
is sometimes held, that the only statements that it is
possible to know are those that are themselves in some
way infallible. The ground for this opinion is that if

_-one knows something to be true one cannot be mis-
taken. As we remarked when contrasting knowledge
with belief, it is inconsistent to say ‘I know but I may
be wrong’. But the reason why this is inconsistent is
that saying ‘I know’ offers a guarantee which saying
‘I may be wrong’ withdraws. It does not follow that
for a fact to be known it must be such that no one
could be mistaken about it or such that it could not
have been otherwise. It is doubtful if there are any
facts about which no one could be mistaken, and while
there are facts which could not be otherwise, they are
not the only ones that can be known. But how can
this second point be reconciled with the fact that what
is known must be true? (The answer is that the state-
ment that what is known must be true is ambiguous. )
It may mean that it is necessary that if something is
known it is true; or it may mean that if something is
known, then it is a necessary truth. The first of these
propositions is correct; it restates the linguistic fact
that what is not true cannot properly be said to be
PHILOSOPHY AND KNOWLEDGE 23

known. But the second is in general false. It would
follow from the first only if all truths were necessary,
which is not the case. To put it another way, there
is a necessary transition from being known to being
true; but that is not to say that what is true, and
known to be true, is necessary or certain in itself.

If we are not to be bound by ordinary usage, it is
still open to us to make it a rule that only what is
certain can be known. That is, we could decide, at
least for the purposes of philosophical discourse, not
to use the word ‘know’ except with the implication
that what was known was necessarily true, or, perhaps,
certain in-some other sense. The consequence would
be that we could still speak of knowing the truth of
a priori statements, such as those of logic and pure
mathematics; and if there were any empirical state-
ments, such as those describing the content of one’s
present experience, that were certain in themselves,
they too might be included: but most of what we now
correctly claim to know would not be knowable, in this
allegedly strict sense. This proposal is feasible, but it
does not appear to have anything much to recommend
it. It is not as if a statement by being necessary
became incapable of being doubted. Every schoolboy
knows that it is possible to be unsure about a mathe-
matical truth. Whether there are any empirical state-
ments which are in any important sense indubitable
is, as we shall see, a matter of dispute: if there are
any they belong to a very narrow class. It is, indeed,
important philosophically to distinguish between neces-
sary and empirical statements, and in dealing with em-
pirical statements to distinguish between different types
and degrees of evidence. But there are better ways

of bringing out these distinctions than by tampering
Cc
24 THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE

with the meaning, or the application, of the verb ‘to
know’.

(iv )
Discussion of method: philosophy and language

We have now answered some of the questions which
are raised by a philosophical enquiry into the nature of
knowledge. It has been found that there is no very
close resemblance between the different instances which
are correctly described as instances of knowing, and in
particular that to know something does not consist in
being in some special state of mind. There are facts which
we can be said to know intuitively, but these intuitions
cannot be infallible. It has further been shown that
the conception of objects of knowledge can be philo-
sophically misleading, and that while there is a sense
in which one cannot be mistaken if one knows that
something is so, this does not imply that what one
knows is itself necessary or indubitable. The whole
discussion was introduced as an example of philosophic
method. Let us therefore consider, for a moment, how
these conclusions have in fact been reached.

An important part of our procedure has been to put
these general questions about knowledge to the test
of particular instances. Thus the proof that one can
know an object, in the sense of being able to recognize
it, without making any conscious judgement about it,
is that it is possible to find examples of such recognition
where there is no evidence that any judgement is made.
The proof that knowing how to do something need not
include the ability to give an account of the way in
which it is done is just that there are many things which
people know how to do without their being able to
PHILOSOPHY AND KNOWLEDGE 25

give any such accounts. To discover that there need
be no difference, in respect of being sure, between
knowing and believing, we need only look at cases in
which it turns out that someone does not know what
he thought he knew. Very often the reason for this is
that what he thought he knew was false. Consequently,
he could not have known it, he only believed it. But
there is no suggestion that his mental state was different
from what it was supposed to be. Had what he
claimed to know been true he would, in these cir-
cumstances, have known it. In such cases we show
that what might be thought to be a necessary factor
in a given type of situation is really not necessary, by
finding examples in which it does not occur. This
is essentially a method of disproof: we cannot so
decisively show that a certain factor is necessary,
merely by finding examples in which it does occur ;
we have to be able to see that its presence is logically
required by the fact that the situation is of the given
type. At the same time we may test the view that it
is so required by searching for counter-examples.
That none are forthcoming is at least an indication that
it is correct. There is a certain analogy here with
scientific reasoning, except that it is not so much a
matter, as in the scientific case, of discovering whether
there are any counter-examples as of deciding whether
there could be. The question is whether there is any-
thing that we should be prepared to count as an
exception to the suggested rule. Thus the proof that
knowing, in the sense of ‘knowing that’, is always
knowledge of some truth is that it would not otherwise
be reckoned as knowledge. But it is not always so
clear whether or not we should be prepared to admit
exceptions. And one way of finding out is to examine
26 THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE

carefully whatever might appear to be a doubtful case.

It does not matter whether the examples taken are
actual or imaginary. In either case we describe a
situation in order to see how it should be classified.
Or if there be no doubt as to its classification, we may
redescribe it in such a way as to bring to light certain
features of it which might otherwise be overlooked.
The argument therefore depends upon considerations
of language ; in the present instance upon the ways in
which we use, or propose to use, the verb ‘to know’.
But this does not mean that it is an argument about
words, in any trivial sense, or that it is especially tied
to the English language. We are concerned with the
work that the word ‘know’ does, not with the fact that
it is this particular word that does it. It is for this
reason that we can spare ourselves a sociological in-
vestigation into the ways in which people actually do
use words. For it would not matter if the popular
practice were different from what we took it to be, so
long as we were clear about the uses that we ourselves
were ascribing to the word in question. And in talking
about these uses we are talking about the uses of any
words in any language that are, or may be, used in the
same way. It is therefore indifferent whether, in this
manner of philosophizing, we represent ourselves as
dealing with words or as dealing with facts. For our en-
quiry into the use of words can equally be regarded as an
enquiry into the nature of the facts which they describe.

Although -we have not been in any way concerned
with setting up a formal system, the argument has also
been developed by means of deductive logic. Thus
the proof that no cognitive state of mind could be
infallible depends upon the logical truism that if two
states of affairs are distinct a statement which refers to
PHILOSOPHY AND KNOWLEDGE 27

only one of them does not entail anything about the
other. If the statement that someone is apprehending,
or intuiting, something is to be regarded purely as a
description of his state of mind it cannot follow from it
that what he apprehends is true. A similar argument
was used by Hume to prove that knowledge of causal
relations ‘is not, in any instance, attained by reasonings
a priort’* ‘The effect’, he says, ‘is totally different
from the cause, and consequently can never be dis-
covered in it.’ Or again, ‘there is no object, which
implies the existence of any other if we consider these
objects in themselves, and never look beyond the idea
which we form of them’.3 As Hume puts them, these
statements are not obviously tautological ; but they be-
come so when it is seen that what he is saying is that
when two objects are distinct, they are distinct; and con-
sequently that to assert the existence of either one of them
is not necessarily to assert the existence of the other.
When they are formulated in this way such state-
ments may seem too trivial to be worth making. But
their consequences are important and easily overlooked.
The proof of this is that any philosophers have in
fact maintained that causality is a logical relation and
that there can be infallible acts of knowing. To refute
them satisfactorily, we may need to do more than
merely point out the logical mistake. We may have to
consider how they could have come to be misled, what
are the arguments which seem to support their view,
how these arguments are to be met. In general, it
will be found that the points of logic on which philo-
sophical theories turn are simple. How much of moral

t D. Hume, An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding, Part I,
section iv, para. 23.

2 Ibid. Part I, section iv, para. 25.

4 D, Hume, A Treatise of Human Nature, Book I, Part III, section vi.
28 THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE

theory, for example, is centred upon the truism, again
remarked by Hume, that ‘ought’ is not implied by ‘is’,
that there can be no deductive step from saying how
things are to saying how they ought to be. What is
difficult is to make the consequences of such truisms
palatable, to discover and neutralize the motives which
lead to their being denied. It is the fact that much
philosophizing consists in persuasive work of this sort,
the fact also that in all philosophy so much depends
upon the way in which things are put, that gives point
to the saying that philosophy is an exercise in rhetoric.
But if this is to be said, it must be understood that the
word ‘rhetoric’ is not to be taken, as it now very often
is, in a pejorative sense.

It is not my purpose to give an exhaustive list of
philosophical procedures. Those that I have described
are typical and important, but they are not the only
ones that will come within our notice. In particular,
it will be seen that philosophers do not limit them-
selves to uncovering the criteria which we actually use
in assessing different types of statement. They also
question these criteria; they may even go so far as to
deny their validity. In this way they come to put
forward paradoxes such as that matter is unreal or
that no one can ever really know what goes on in the
mind of another. In themselves such statements may
seem merely perverse: their philosophical importance
comes out in the discussion of what lies behind them.

(v)

Knowing as having the right to be sure

The answers which we have found for the questions
we have so far been discussing have not yet put us in
PHILOSOPHY AND KNOWLEDGE 29

a position to give a complete account of what it is to
know that something is the case. The first require-
ment is that what is known should be true, but this
is not sufficient; not even if we add to it the further
condition that one must be completely sure of what one
knows. For it is possible to be completely sure of
something which is in fact true, but yet not to know it.
The circumstances may be such that one is not entitled
to be sure. For instance, a superstitious person who
had inadvertently walked under a ladder might be con-
vinced as a result that he was about to suffer some mis-
fortune; and he might in fact be right. But it would
not be correct to say that he knew that this was going
to be so. He arrived at his belief by a process of
reasoning which would not be generally reliable; so,
although his prediction came true, it was not a case of
knowledge. Again, if someone were fully persuaded
of a mathematical proposition by a proof which could
be shown to be invalid, he would not, without further
evidence, be said to know the proposition, even though
it was true. But while it is not hard to find examples of
true and fully confident beliefs which in some ways fail
to meet the standards required for knowledge, it is not
at all easy to determine exactly what these standards are.

One way of trying to discover them would be to
consider what would count as satisfactory answers to
the question How do you know? Thus people may be
credited with knowing truths of mathematics or logic
if they are able to give a valid proof of them, or even if,
without themselves being able to set out such a proof,
they have obtained this information from someone who
can. Claims to know empirical statements may be
upheld by a reference to perception, or to memory, or
to testimony, or to historical records, or to scientific
30 THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE

laws. But such backing is not always strong enough
for knowledge. Whether it is so or not depends upon
the circumstances of the particular case. If I were
asked how I knew that a physical object of a certain
sort was in such and such a place, it would, in general,
be a sufficient answer for me to say that I could see
it; but if my eyesight were bad and the light were dim,
this answer might not be sufficient. Even though I
was right, it might still be said that I did not really
know that the object was there. If I have a poor
memory and the event which I claim to remember is
remote, my memory of it may still not amount to
knowledge, even though in this instance it does not
fail me. If a witness is unreliable, his unsupported
evidence may not enable us to know that what he says
is true, even in a case where we completely trust him
and he is not in fact deceiving us. In a given instance
it is possible to decide whether the backing is strong
enough to justify a claim to knowledge. But to say
in general how strong it has to be would require our
drawing up a list of the conditions under which per-
ception, or memory, or testimony, or other forms of
evidence are reliable. And this would be a very
complicated matter, if indeed it could be done at all.
Moreover, we cannot assume that, even in particular
instances, an answer to the question How do you
know? will always be forthcoming. There may very
well be cases in which one knows that something is so
without its being possible to say how one knows it.
I am not so much thinking now of claims to know
facts of immediate experience, statements like ‘I know
that I feel pain’, which raise problems of their own
into which we shall enter later on.1 In cases of this

1 Vide Chapter II, section iv.
PHILOSOPHY AND KNOWLEDGE 31

sort it may be argued that the question how one knows
does not arise. But even when it clearly does arise, it
may not find an answer. Suppose that someone were
consistently successful in predicting events of a certain
kind, events, let us say, which are not ordinarily thought
to be predictable, like the results of a lottery. If his
run of successes were sufficiently impressive, we might
very well come to say that he knew which number
would win, even though he did not reach this con-
clusion by any rational method, or indeed by any
method at all. We might say that he knew it by
intuition, but this would be to assert no more than
that he did know it but that we could not say how. In
the same way, if someone were consistently successful
in reading the minds of others without having any of
the usual sort of evidence, we might say that he knew
these things telepathically. But in default of any
further explanation this would come down to saying
merely that he did know them, but not by any ordinary
means. Words like ‘intuition’ and ‘telepathy’ are
brought in just to disguise the fact that no explanation
has been found.

But if we allow this sort of knowledge to be even
theoretically possible, what becomes of the distinction
between knowledge and true belief? How does our,
man who knows what the results of the lottery will be
differ from one who only makes a series of lucky
guesses? The answer is that, so far as the man himself
is concerned, there need not be any difference. His
procedure and his state of mind, when he is said to
know what will happen, may be exactly the same as
when it is said that he is only guessing. The difference
is that to say that he knows is to concede to him the
right to be sure, while to say that he is only guessing
32 THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE

is to withhold it. Whether we make this concession
will depend upon the view which we take of his perform-
ance. Normally we do not say that people know things
unless they have followed one of the accredited routes
to knowledge. If someone reaches a true conclusion
without appearing to have any adequate basis for it,
we are likely to say that he does not really know it.
But if he were repeatedly successful in a given domain,
we might very well come to say that he knew the facts
in question, even though we could not explain how he
knew them. We should grant him the right to be sure,
simply on the basis of his success. ‘This is, indeed, a
point on which people’s views might be expected to
differ. Not everyone would regard a successful run
of predictions, however long sustained, as being by
itself a sufficient backing for a claim to knowledge.
And here there can be no question of proving that this
attitude is mistaken. Where there are recognized
criteria for deciding when one has the right to be sure,
anyone who insists that their being satisfied is still not
enough for knowledge may be accused, for what the
charge is worth, of misusing the verb ‘to know’. But
it is possible to find, or at any rate to devise, examples
which are not covered in this respect by any established
rule of usage. Whether they are to count as instances
of knowledge is then a question which we are left free
to decide.

It does not, however, matter very greatly which
decision we take. The main problem is to state and
assess the grounds on which these claims to knowledge
are made, to settle, as it were, the candidate’s marks.
It is a relatively unimportant question what titles we
then bestow upon them. So long as we agree about
the marking, it is of no great consequence where -we
PHILOSOPHY AND KNOWLEDGE 33

draw the line between pass and failure, or between
the different levels of distinction. If we choose to set
a very high standard, we may find ourselves committed
to saying that some of what ordinarily passes for know-
ledge ought rather to be described as probable opinion.
And some critics will then take us to task for flouting
ordinary usage. But the question is purely one of
terminology. It is to be decided, if at all, on grounds
of practical convenience.

One must not confuse this case, where the markings
are agreed upon, and what is in dispute is only the
bestowal of honours, with the case where it is the
markings themselves that are put in question. For
this second case is philosophically important, in a way
in which the other is not. The sceptic who asserts that
we do not know all that we think we know, or even
perhaps that we do not strictly know anything at all, is
not suggesting that we are mistaken when we conclude
that the recognized criteria for knowing have been
satisfied. Nor is he primarily concerned with getting
us to revise our usage of the verb ‘to know’, any more
than one who challenges our standards of value is
trying to make us revise our usage of the word ‘good’.
The disagreement is about the application of the word,
rather than its meaning. What the sceptic contends is
that our markings are too high; that the grounds on
which we are normally ready to concede the right to
be sure are worth less than we think; he may even go
so far as to say that they are not worth anything at all.
The attack is directed, not against the way in which
we apply our standards of proof, but against these
standards themselves. It has, as we shall see, to be
taken seriously because of the arguments by which it
is supported. =
34 THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE

I conclude then that the necessary and sufficient
conditions for knowing that something is the case are
first that what one is said to know be true, secondly
that one be sure of it, and thirdly that one should have
the right to be sure. This right may be earned in
various ways; but even if one could give a complete
description of them it would be a mistake to try to
build it into the definition of knowledge, just as it
would be a mistake to try to incorporate our actual
standards of goodness into a definition of good. And
this being so, it turns out that the questions which
philosophers raise about the possibility of knowledge
are not all to be settled by discovering what knowledge
is. For many of them reappear as questions about the
legitimacy of the title to be sure. They need to be
severally examined; and this is the main concern of
what is called the theory of knowledge.
